---
section: "OPENING PROCEDURES"
title: "Slide 46"
title: "Poll Pad Home Screen"
layout: slide
---

Your Poll Pads are now ready for voters! Let’s go through the home screen.

**TOP LEFT**: The "Last Imported" date should be the day of the election, if you correctly imported the updated voter file from the iSync drive.

**TOP RIGHT**: The "Sync menu" indicates whether the Poll Pad is wirelessly synchronizing with the other Poll Pads in the precinct. You can open this on election day for more detailed information.

**IMPORTANT: Poll Pads now wirelessly communicate with each other using Bluetooth. Keep your Poll Pads within** ***30 feet*** **of each other for the best sync performance. If they stop synchronizing, bring them closer together or call the Chief.**

**IN TAN BANNER**:

- **Precinct Records**: This shows how many registered voters there are in your precinct. On election day, this will show approximately 1,000-5,000 voters in your precinct.

- **Checkins**: This shows how many voters you have checked in on this Poll Pad. As you check in voters on election day, this number will increase. (The number of voters checked-in across all Poll Pads is accessible in the Summary Report.)

- **Countywide Records**: Shows how many registered voters there are in the county. On election day, this will show 700,000+ voters.

Remember to plug the Poll Pads into the power strips and ensure that no cables are a tripping hazard. The battery indicator in the tablet’s top right corner should turn green. Keep the Poll Pads charged throughout the day. In the event of a power outage, they can run on battery power.
