---
layout: slide
title: "What is CAP?"
---

CAP stands for **Central Absentee Precinct**.  CAP is responsible for all ballots submitted prior to election day.

There are two ways a voter may submit a ballot prior to election day:
	1.  A voter may request an absentee ballot and return his/her submission by mail or at a drop box location.   Typically, a voter submission is a voted ballot in a B envelope, all enclosed in a return mailer.
	2.  A voter may vote in person at a satellite location.

So, there are two separate and distinct CAP operations.

CAP Absentee (CAP AB) operations take place at the Fairfax County Government Center.  CAP AB is responsible for processing and scanning mail-in and drop box voter submissions. CAP AB operations actually begin with preprocessing.  These operations continue on election day and go through noon on the Friday after election day.   Post-election day processing handles mail-in voter submissions, postmarked by election day, but not received until after election day. 

CAP Early Voting (CAP EV) operations also occur at the Government Center, but operations take place only on election day.  As you are aware, Fairfax County voters may vote early, up to 45 days in advance of election day, at any one of multiple locations set up throughout the county (satellite locations).  A voter arrives at a satellite location, receives a ballot, marks their choices on the ballot, and then places the ballot in an on-site digital scanner.  After satellite operations conclude prior to election day, all the digital scanning machines and any unscannable ballots are returned to the Government Center.  On election day, CAP EV personnel close the polls on the digital scanners, produce voting results reports, and collate the voting results to produce a single report showing the vote totals from all the early voting satellite locations. 
