---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 7"
title: "FAQs"
---

**Hours of service:**
 Preprocessing operations will take place Monday, September 28th, through Saturday, October 31st. Depending on the volume of mailed-in ballots, it may be necessary to work on some Sundays, especially closer to election day.

CAP preprocessors are scheduled to work six hours per day, either on a Monday/ Wednesday/Friday rotation or on a Tuesday/Thursday/Saturday rotation. Those who choose the early shift will work from 8:30 AM until 2:30 PM. Late shift preprocessors will work from 3:00 PM until 9:00 PM.

**Location:**
 Preprocessing will take place at the Fairfax County Government Center, Conference Room 8 and Rooms 9/10.

**What to wear:**
 Business casual and clean, unripped jeans are acceptable. Wear layers as the temperature in the Government Center can vary. No political commentary is allowed on clothing.

**What to bring:**
 You should bring snacks, beverages, water, etc. The Government Center cafeteria is open from 7:00 AM until 1:30 PM with a limited menu. You may bring electronic devices such as a phone or tablet, but you may not use them while at the processing workstations.

**Payment:**
 Pre-election processors are non-merit, temporary employees of Fairfax County. These are hourly wage positions, paid at the S-9 rate, and do not include Fairfax County benefits such as sick or annual leave or participation in the Fairfax County insurance or retirement programs. Preprocessors will be required to record hours on a payroll time sheet.

As temporary employees of Fairfax County, you are required to wear your county identification badge at all times.

**Training Manual:**
 Preprocessors are encouraged to consult the Pre-election Ballot Processing Manual for more detailed information about processes and procedures. We will send you a link for a downloadable copy once the file is available.