---
layout: slide
title: "Domestic B Envelope"
---

The domestic B envelope is found inside the domestic return mailer.  A digital ballot will be inside the B envelope. Digital ballots are pre-printed ballots on heavy stock issued by the Office of Elections and can be read by a digital scan machine.  The B envelope does not have to be sealed.

 The information on the B envelope is very important:
*     The domestic B envelope includes a preprinted voter information label in the upper left-hand corner.  This label, printed by the Office of Elections, contains identifying information about the authorized absentee voter who requested the ballot.  This same voter must complete his/her B envelope with the same identifying information.
*     Preprocessors review the information on the B envelope to determine if any material omissions are present.
*     The Ballot officer also reads the voter’s name and address from the B envelope so the VERIS officer can verify that the correct voter has been located in VERIS.

Possible circumstances:
*    What if there is no B envelope?  This is a material omission; you may not process this ballot.  Place the mailer with all contents in the "Not Processed" table box.
*    What If the ballot is not inside the B envelope?  This is also a material omission.   Do not process this ballot.  Place the mailer with all contents in the "Not Processed" table box.
*    What if there are two or more B envelopes inside a single return mailer?  Both voter submissions may be preprocessed.