---
layout: slide
title: "Request for Assistance Form"
---

Typically, preprocessors will not evaluate voter submissions that include Request for Assistance forms.  However, just in case, these are the basic points to understand:

The Request for Assistance form has 3 sections.

1.  Instructions
         - If the voter or his assistant chooses "Yes, I need assistance", the assistant must complete both the form and the B envelope correctly.
         - If the voter chooses "No", the blue form may be returned blank, but the voter must complete the B envelope correctly.

2.  Voter information:  The assistant must complete this section. "Unable to Sign" or "Blind Voter" must appear on the voter signature line.  In some instances, the voter may actually sign on the signature line.  If the voter provides his signature on the form, he must also sign the B envelope.

3.  Assistant’s information:  Name, address and signature of assistant must appear on the form.
 
If the Request for Assistance form is complete and "Unable to Sign" or "Blind Voter" is written on the signature line, the voter’s signature can be missing from the B envelope, but no other material omissions may be present.  Remember, if the voter signs the Request for Assistance form, the voter must also sign the B envelope.

If the Request for Assistance form is incorrectly completed and/or the B envelope contains material omissions, place the return mailer with all contents in the "Not Processed" table box.

Make sure to refer to the Material Omissions chart.  If there are still questions, call the team leader.

The blue Request for Assistance form should remain with the m