---
layout: slide
title: "Email B Envelope"
---

The email B envelope is similar to the UOCAVA B envelope and is subject to the same set of material omissions.  No address is required.  No date is required.  The voter does not even have to provide a printed name.  If either of the two signatures is missing, the ballot cannot be processed (The witness signature is waived during declared public health emergencies, as in the June 2021 primary election).  Place the mailer with all contents in the "Not Processed" table box.  

As mentioned previously, the voter prints a copy of the B envelope.  Notice the dotted lines that indicate "Fold Lines".   After the voter marks the ballot, he will fold the B envelope around the ballot so that the ballot is enclosed within.  Be prepared for lots of tape, glue, etc.

Also be prepared for many different sizes of printed email ballots.  However, no matter the size of the printed ballot, it must be enclosed in the B envelope. 

Possible Circumstances:
*  Some voters cut on the dotted lines and tape the information portion onto a separate envelope, placing the ballot inside this envelope before inserting everything inside the return mailer.  This ballot can be preprocessed.
*  If a voter cuts along the dotted lines and only places the information portion into the return mailer with the ballot, this ballot cannot be preprocessed.  The ballot was not enclosed in the B envelope.  Place the mailer with all contents in the "Not Processed" table box.
