---
layout: slide
title: "Ballot Officer Details:  Step 4"
---

4.     The Ballot Officer selects the first mailer from the first batch and removes the B envelope.  
a.     Compare the name and address on the B envelope to the name and address on the voter information label.  Place any mismatches in the "Not Processed" table box. 
b.     Examine the B envelope for material omissions.  If material omissions are present, put the B envelope back into the mailer and place it in the "Not Processed" table box.  Always ensure mailers in the "Not  Processed" table box contain all contents, including the ballot.
c.     Review voter information label for special circumstances:  ID Required or Needs Assistance (NA).

Does the voter information label indicate ID Required?  Look for the additional "ID Verified" sticker on the front of the mailer.
If the "ID Verified" sticker is present and the B envelope is correctly completed, the voter’s submission may be preprocessed.
If the sticker is present but the B envelope contains material omissions, place mailer with all contents in the "Not Processed" table box.
If there is no "ID Verified" sticker, place mailer with all contents in the "Not Processed" table box.

Does the voter information label indicate Needs Assistance (NA)?  The mailer may include a blue Needs Assistance form.
If the blue form is included, place mailer with all contents, in the "Not Processed" table box.
If the blue form is not included but the voter signed the B envelope and the B envelope is completed correctly, the voter’s submission may be preprocessed.
If the blue form is not included but the B envelope contains material omissions, place it in the "Not Processed" table box. 
