---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 50"
title: "Reconciliation"
---

The reconciliation procedure includes a number of steps. After preprocessing a set of ballots:

- Count the number of **emptied*** B envelopes (in mailers) accumulated for that set. Remember also to account for any mailer that may have included two B envelopes.
- The ballot officer records the total number of empty B envelopes in the appropriate section of the ballot count worksheet. Ensure that this count is placed in the appropriate CD field.
- Count the flattened processed ballots.
- The ballot officer records the total number of processed ballots in the appropriate section of the ballot count worksheet.

- Compare the number of empty B envelopes with the number of processed ballots. Resolve any discrepancy.

* If necessary, recount ballots and empty B envelopes.

* If the number of empty B envelopes is greater than the number of ballots, check the B envelopes for ballots that may have been left inside.

* If the number of ballots is greater than the number of empty B envelopes, check the mailing envelopes for notations indicating multiple ballots inside. Also check the "Not Processed" table box for processed envelopes.

* Discuss any remaining discrepancy with the preprocessing shift leader.

- The ballot officer also records the number of mailers placed in the Not Processed table box for each set.

- Only after the numbers reconcile,take the flattened ballots to the shift leader.

- Rubber band the mailers with B envelopes together. On the top envelope, write the date, count, team number and set number. Keep the banded bundle to the back of the "Mailers with B Envelopes" table box.

Each individual team will complete a ballot count worksheet for all sets of ballots preprocessed during a shift. At the end of the shift, the Ballot Officer must also add up each column to calculate the team's daily grand totals.

Remember: Accuracy is essential!