---
layout: slide
title: "Reconciliation"
---

The reconciliation procedure includes a number of steps.  After preprocessing a set of ballots:

1.  Count the number of **emptied** B envelopes (in mailers) accumulated for that set.  Be sure to account for multiple B envelopes in a single mailer.
2.  The ballot officer records the total number of empty B envelopes in the appropriate section of the ballot count worksheet. Ensure that this count is placed in the appropriate Congressional District and Delegate District fields. 
3.  Count the flattened processed ballots.
4.  The ballot officer records the total number of processed ballots in the appropriate section of the ballot count worksheet. 
5.  Compare the number of empty B envelopes with the number of processed ballots. Resolve any discrepancy.
*      If necessary, recount ballots and empty B envelopes. 
*      If the number of empty B envelopes is greater than the number of ballots, check the B envelopes for ballots that may have been left inside.
*      If the number of ballots is greater than the number of empty B envelopes, check the mailing envelopes for notations indicating multiple ballots inside. Also check the "Not Processed" table box for processed envelopes.
*      Discuss any remaining discrepancy with the preprocessing shift leader. 
6.  The ballot officer also records the number of mailers placed in the Not Processed table box for each set.
7.  Only after the numbers reconcile, place a batch wrapper around the ballots with the following information:  Team #, Set#, Number of processed ballots, Number of DNS ballots.  Take the set of ballots to the shift leader for storage in the blue security case.  
8.  Rubber band the mailers with B envelopes together.  Keep the banded bundle to the back of the "Mailers with B Envelopes" table box.

Each individual team will complete a ballot count worksheet for all sets of ballots preprocessed during a shift.  At the end of the shift, the Ballot Officer must add up each column to calculate the team’s daily grand totals. Then, the VERIS Officer verifies the calculations. This final step may seem repetitive, but verification of the calculations helps tremendously to identify and correct errors early in the process. 

Remember:  Accuracy is essential