---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 7"
title: "FAQs"
---

CAP EOs work either full day shifts, a morning shift or an afternoon shift. A full day shift is from **5:30 a.m. until dismissal**. Morning shift is from 5:30 a.m. until 1:30 p.m. Afternoon shift is from 1 p.m. until dismissal. Note that polls close at 7 p.m. and it generally takes at least two hours to close CAP.

What to wear: business casual and clean, unripped jeans are acceptable. Wear layers as the temperature in the Government Center can be variable. No political commentary is allowed on garments.

What to bring: You should bring all food, medicine, and reading material you need for the day. Note that reading material may not be politically-oriented. You may bring electronic devices such as a phone or tablet, but you may not use them while at a processing table.

Payment: You are paid $175 for a full day of service (or $87.50 for half-day shifts). Officers who arrive late (more than 15 minutes) may be penalized $25 or dismissed immediately.

Voting: CAP election officers are encouraged to take advantage of early voting as it will be difficult for most EOs to vote on election day.

Location and Badges: CAP operations are conducted in the Fairfax County Government Center conference area on the second floor. When you come in the front door of the Government Center, veer to your left and go through the double doors. Pick up your badge inside that door (it will have your name and room location). Wear your badge at all times as CAP is a secure area with security personnel at both ends of the center.

Training manual: An EO training manual is available for download from PollChief. It provides extensive detail on conducting CAP operations.

Reminder: No political discussions in CAP. You cannot leave the CAP area, so make sure you bring everything you need with you for the day.