---
layout: slide
title: "What is CAP?"
---

CAP stands for **Central Absentee Precinct**.  CAP is responsible for all ballots submitted or voted prior to election day. 

There are two ways a voter may submit a ballot prior to election day.  
	1. Voters may request an absentee ballot and return their voter submission by mail or drop box (a voter submission is the voted ballot enclosed in the B envelope which is inside the return mailer).   
	2. Voters may vote in person at a satellite Early Voting location.

Therefore, there are two separate and distinct CAP operations.

CAP Absentee (CAP AB) is located in the Fairfax County Government Center.  CAP AB is responsible for all ballots submitted by mail or drop box.  CAP AB operates from election day through noon on the Friday after election day.   Post election day processing is to handle voter submissions returned by mail that are postmarked by election day but not received until after election day. 

CAP Early Voting (CAP EV) does not process voter submissions.  Early Voting is conducted at multiple locations throughout the county (satellite locations)  where voters receive a ballot which is scanned at the remote location.  All of the digital scanning machines and any unscannable ballots are returned to the Government Center prior to election day.  On election day, CAP EV personnel open the digital scanners, produce voting results reports and collate the voting results to produce a single report showing the vote results from all the satellites. 
