---
section: "BEFORE POLLS OPEN"
title: "Slide 13"
title: "Voting room layout"
layout: slide
---

This is a sample room layout to give you an idea of the flow inside a voting room.

- In this room, the voter enters, asks any questions of the Voter Information Officer, and then proceeds to the check-in table with the Poll Pads.
- If there are any issues checking in the voter, they would be directed to the Chief's Table, where the Chief or Assistant Chief may help resolve the issue.
- After the voter is checked in, they move to the Ballot Table where they will receive their ballot. Each ballot may be given to the voter in a privacy folder.
- After receiving a ballot, the voter goes to the voting tables and sits in a vacant privacy booth to mark their ballot.
- If the voter chooses to use the ExpressVote accessible marking device, an officer should guide them there. Note that the ExpressVote also has a privacy booth around it.
- Lastly, the voter moves to the DS200, scans their ballot, and exits the room.

The voting room should be set up to have the voter move in a circular fashion, without crossing the paths of other voters, and with an election officer at each station to help guide them.

Remember that one officer will also be stationed at the Absentee Ballot Drop-Off Box at all times. The Absentee Ballot Drop-Off Box should be placed outside the polling place (building) entrance, so voters may quickly drop off their completed absentee ballots without waiting in line.



