---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 36"
title: "Rejecting a Ballot"
---

During processing operations, unfortunately, you will come across B envelopes that contain material omissions. In other words, these B envelopes are incomplete (missing names, addresses, signatures) or incorrectly filled out (incorrect name, out of state address, etc.). This voter submission must be rejected.

EO#1 states that the voter's B envelope contains a material omission. EO#2 verifies that there is a material omission. If there is a discrepancy in opinion, CALL THE CHIEF.

EO#2 finds the voter on the EPB in the usual manner. After selecting the correct voter to access the voter's detail page, EO#2 clicks on the rejected flag (in the upper right-hand corner of voter's detail page), then selects "Check Voter In". The confirmation screen appears; EO#2 clicks "Confirm".

If you check in a voter and then realize you forgot to check the rejected flag, click on the voter's name to return to that voter's detail page. Check the Rejected flag and select the "Back To List" button on the lower right-hand corner of the detail page. You will return to the original list of voters. The voter's ballot will now show as rejected.

If you mistakenly reject a ballot, click on the voter's name to return to the voter's detail page. Remove the Rejected flag and select the "Back To List" button on the lower right-hand corner of the voter's detail page. You will return to the original list of voters. The rejected status has been removed.