---
section: ""
title: "Slide 7"
title: "FAQs"
layout: slide
---

Hours of service: The schedule of operations is based on the volume of mailed-in and drop box voter submissions. The projected start date is Wednesday, May 18th, 2022 but this date may change as the election nears. Mailer Check-In operations will continue through Friday, June 24th, at the close of CAP, post-election day. Staff will be advised of the overall schedule as soon as the Office of Elections understands the anticipated volume of ballots.

Keep in mind that scheduling and assignment flexibility is key! You may or may not be assigned on any given day. We ask you to remain happily flexible! You know the routine...it all depends on the mail!

Location: Mailer Check-In will take place at the Fairfax County Government Center, at a location to be determined.

What to wear: Business casual and clean, unripped jeans are acceptable. Wear layers as the temperature in the Government Center can vary. No overt political commentary is allowed on clothing or jewelry.

What to bring: You should bring snacks, beverages, water, etc. The Government Center cafeteria is open from 7:00 AM until 1:30 PM with a limited menu. You may bring electronic devices such as a phone or tablet, but you may not use them while at the processing workstations.

Work Environment - COVID-19: The county's Contingency Response Plan for COVID-19 has changed. Masks are now optional for staff members in county facilities, except where health or medical services are provided. Of course, to protect the health of others, if you are ill, please stay home. Notify the election office as soon as possible so a replacement can be identified and contacted. If you become ill while on the job, likewise, return home.

Payment: Mailer check-in staff are non-merit, temporary employees of Fairfax County. These are hourly wage positions, paid at the S-9 rate, and do not include Fairfax County benefits such as sick or annual leave or participation in the Fairfax County insurance or retirement programs. Staff will be required to properly document hours worked.

County Badges: As temporary employees of Fairfax County, you are required to wear your county identification badge at all times.

Training Manual: You are encouraged to consult the Mailer Check-In Manual for more detailed information about processes and procedures. We will send you a link for a downloadable copy once the file is available.