---
section: ""
title: "Slide 13"
title: "New and/or Noteworthy"
layout: slide
---

For returning Mailer Check-In staff, you will find some changes to operations for the upcoming election.

- As in November 2021, Mailer Check-In will continue to be a "one-person team" operation.

- The former voter submission, an outer mailer containing a B envelope containing a ballot, is history! A new return mailer was developed for the November 2021 election and found to be successful. This mailer will continue to do its double duty for the upcoming election. One side of the return mailer contains the Office of Elections address. The other side of the return mailer contains the voter information label AND the Statement of Absentee Voter (or voter statement), eliminating the need for a separate B envelope.

- Mailer check-in operations have eliminated one step but added another. You will no longer be required to update a voter's ballot status in VERIS to "Marked" before updating the status to "Pre-Processed". Instead, you can now directly change the voter's ballot status to "Pre-Processed". But just when you thought we were saving you some process time, a new step was added into the operation: the inclusion of a Bundle Number in each voter's record. We will address the how and why of this additional step later in the training.

- As in November 2021, ballots are not removed from the mailers by the Check-In Team.

- An additional review of checked-in mailers is now a standard practice, completed at the end of each Mailer Check-In day. This step functions as a "double check" to ensure accurate recording in VERIS.

These changes have been instituted so that the entire CAP operation can function more efficiently. However, there is NO change to what is expected of mailer check-in staff: a compliance with operational procedures, an attention to detail, and a focus on accuracy.