---
section: ""
title: "Slide 21"
title: "Request for Assistance/ID Required"
layout: slide
---

Some voters must include additional documentation with their ballots.

For those voters who have indicated on their absentee ballot applications that they will need assistance to complete their voter statements and/or to mark their ballots, the letters NA (Needs Assistance) will appear on the right side of the voter information label.

When reviewing the return mailer of a Needs Assistance (NA) voter, you may observe that the voter actually signed the voter statement. Perhaps this voter no longer needs assistance or the original request for the form was made in error. If the voter signed the voter statement, a Request for Assistance form is NOT required. In this case, the mailer may be checked in. You, of course, must ensure that the Statement of Absentee Voter is completed correctly with no material omissions.

If assistance is requested, the voter will receive a blue "Request for Assistance" form. In most cases, a completed blue form will be returned in the mailer along with the ballot. If you see the NA designation on a voter's information label and the voter did not sign the voter statement, do NOT process this mailer. Place the mailer in the "Needs Cure" table box.

In federal elections, some voters, usually first time voters who have registered by mail but did not include an acceptable form of identification with their registration, must submit this documentation with their ballots. Their voter information label indicates "ID Required". If you see the "ID Required" designation on a voter's information label, do not check in this voter. Place the mailer in the "Needs Cure" table box.