---
section: ""
title: "Slide 41"
title: "Mailers with Barcodes - Operation Details"
layout: slide
---

Step 10. Continue scanning. The list of voters on the screen will grow longer each time a new mailer is scanned. Each time you scan, listen closely for a "beep". Verify that the name on the mailer is the same name that appears on the VERIS screen, that the ballot Status is "Marked", and that the Status Reason is "Ballot Returned".

Once scanned, place each mailer, facedown, in the separated pile.

VERIS is programmed to allow 10 mailers to be batch scanned at one time. After you have successfully scanned 10 mailers, take one more look at the VERIS screen to reconfirm:

- The count in the upper right corner shows 10

- Status shows "Marked" for all voters

- Status Reason shows "Ballot Returned" for all voters.

Step 11. Remain on this screen. Change each voter's ballot status to Pre-Processed, using the arrows to access the dropdown menu.

Step 12. Locate the Status Reason column, indicating "Ballot Returned" for all voters. Replace "Ballot Returned" with the correct bundle number (indicated on the tray label) for each voter. (Hint: Type the bundle number for the first voter, then use the copy/paste function for the following nine voters.) This will mean a bit more work for the Check-In Team but will save hours of time for staff members taxed with finding a mailer from a specific voter.

Problems?

Immediately notify the team leader if any mailer will not scan or an error message pops up on the computer.