







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 1"
title: "Welcome"
---

Welcome to the Fairfax County Office of Elections Central Absentee Precinct's online training class for Mailer Check-In.

This course is designed to provide both new and returning staff with the knowledge required to successfully participate in the Mailer Check-in operation.

Please take some time to review this online training. As always, we welcome your questions and comments. We hope you will share any insights you may have as you participate in this class.







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 2"
title: "Notes and Class Topics"
---

Please review all the information in these slides at your own pace. You may pause at any time.

As the course progresses, you will become familiar with the practical information necessary to serve as a staff member in the Office of Elections as well as with the detailed procedures required to accomplish the very specialized tasks associated with Mailer Check-In.

The course topics include:

- What is CAP?
- What is Mailer Check-In?
- Basic Information
- Evaluation of voter submissions
- The various types of voter submissions
- Using the Virginia Election and Registration Information System (VERIS) to check in a voter
- Mini-review







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 3"
title: "Guiding Principles"
---

Please take a moment to review these principles.

As we plan for and conduct each election, we follow these four guiding principles to maintain the integrity of the election. These principles must direct each step and action you take.

It is important for you, as members of the mailer check-in staff, to read, understand_,_ and embody these principles, to perform all duties assigned to you by the Office of Elections, and to do so faithfully, diligently, and impartially.







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 4"
title: "What is CAP"
---

CAP stands for **Central Absentee Precinct**. CAP is responsible for all ballots submitted prior to election day.

There are two ways a voter may submit a ballot prior to election day:

1. A voter may request an absentee ballot and return his/her ballot by mail or at a drop box location.

2. A voter may vote in person at an early voting satellite location.

So, there are two separate and distinct CAP operations.

For Absentee Ballots received by-mail or drop box:

CAP is responsible for processing and counting mail-in and drop box voter submissions. These operations begin prior to election day, continue on election day, and end at noon on the Friday after election day. Post-election day processing handles mail-in voter submissions, postmarked by election day, but not received until after election day. All CAP processing operations take place at the Fairfax County Government Center.

Please note: for the November 2022 election, the Friday after election day is Veterans Day, a federal holiday. Therefore, post-election CAP operations will extend through Monday, November 14th. Although we will continue to process mailers received by noon on Monday, November 14th, these mailers must exhibit the acceptable postmark, on or before election day.

For In-Person Absentee Voting:

Fairfax County voters may vote early, up to 45 days in advance of election day, at any one of multiple satellite locations set up throughout the county. A voter arrives at a satellite location, receives a ballot, marks their choices on the ballot, and then places the ballot in an on-site digital scanner. On election day, CAP is responsible for submitting the final report which includes the satellite location voting results as well as the number of in-person absentee voters and ballots.







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 5"
title: "What is Mailer Check-In?"
---

One of CAPs main objectives is to fairly evaluate the mail-in and drop box submissions from Fairfax County voters as well as to scrupulously account for their ballots and their votes. Mailer Check-In is an integral element of this operation.

In accordance with state law, authorized absentee voter submissions may be processed by CAP staff. This procedure entails:

- evaluating the voter submissions returned by mail or drop box
- updating a voter's status in VERIS (the state-wide data base)

Check-in data is ultimately included in the Statement of Results (SOR) on election day.







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 6"
title: "Basic Information"
---

We will now go over some basic administrative information and provide some practical knowledge that will come in handy before you begin mailer check-in operations.







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 7"
title: "FAQs"
---

**Hours of service:** The schedule of operations is based on the volume of mailed-in and drop box voter submissions. The projected start date is Wednesday, September 28, 2022 but this date may change as the election nears. Mailer Check-In operations will continue through Monday, November 14, at the close of CAP, post-election day. Staff will be advised of the overall schedule as soon as the Office of Elections understands the anticipated volume of ballots.

Keep in mind that scheduling and assignment flexibility is key! You may or may not be assigned on any given day. We ask you to remain happily flexible! You know the routine...it all depends on the mail!

**Location:** Mailer Check-In will take place at the Fairfax County Government Center, in Room 339.

**What to wear:** Business casual and clean, unripped jeans are acceptable. Wear layers as the temperature in the Government Center can vary. No overt political commentary is allowed on clothing or jewelry.

**What to bring:** You should bring snacks, beverages, water, etc. The Government Center cafeteria is open from 7:00 AM until 2:00 PM with a limited menu. You may bring electronic devices such as a phone or tablet, but you may not use them while at the processing workstations.

**Payment:** Mailer check-in staff are non-merit, temporary employees of Fairfax County. These are hourly wage positions, paid at the S-9 rate, and do not include Fairfax County benefits such as sick or annual leave or participation in the Fairfax County insurance or retirement programs. Staff will be required to properly document hours worked.

**County Badges:** As temporary employees of Fairfax County, you are required to wear your county identification badge at all times.

**Training:** You are encouraged to consult the Mailer Check-In Manual for more detailed information about Mailer Check-In processes and procedures. We will send you a link for a downloadable copy once the file is available. In addition, Fairfax County requires all employees, including temporary employees, to participate in mandatory training classes, such as "Code of Ethics", "DIT Security Awareness", "Discrimination Policy", etc.







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 8"
title: "Security"
---

Safeguarding voter and ballot information is the responsibility of everyone on the mailer check-in staff. You may not communicate any information you see or hear to any unauthorized person while mailer check-in operations are in session as well as when you leave the work area.

That includes:

- Not posting on any social media.
- Not using your cell phone at the workstations (except to access VERIS), and especially while handling any voter or ballot information.
- Not taking photos/videos during mailer check-in operations.
- Not connecting to the Internet while in CAP workrooms.







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 9"
title: "Mailer Check-In Positions"
---

One team leader is responsible for overseeing all operations, ensuring that mailer check-in procedures are followed. The team leader is further responsible for managing the daily paperwork and ensuring that mailers are properly secured at the end of each day.

Mailer check-in staff is responsible for correctly checking in mailers from absentee voters returned by mail or drop box.

Authorized representatives and other observers may be present in the mailer check-in workroom. Authorized representatives are party or candidate representatives with written authorization. They are authorized to hear and observe processing activities but may not interfere with the orderly conduct of the operation, touch/handle any mailer, or examine information on the VERIS computer screens.







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 10"
title: "Start of Day"
---

On arrival at the Government Center, follow signs to the mailer check-in workroom.

Your team leader will provide your workstation assignment.

The Office of Elections' Deputy Registrar for Absentee Voting will administer the election oath on the first day; you must sign the election oath form.

The team leader will provide instructions regarding how to complete payroll time documentation. It is each staff member's responsibility to ensure that payroll documentation is completed daily.

The team leader will provide a daily briefing, as needed, and answer questions regarding logistical and processing procedures.







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 11"
title: "During the Day"
---

The main functions of mailer check-In staff include:

- Reviewing mailers to remove any mis-sorted mailer types (digital or email) and unused or undeliverable submissions.
- Examining mailers to ensure that an authorized voter has provided a correct and complete voter statement and then making an important determination: to "check-in" or "not check-in". (That is the question!)
- Locating a voter in VERIS
- Updating a voter's ballot status.
- Managing mailers
- Maintaining the Mailer Count worksheet.

During this training, we provide the "best practices" to accomplish each function of the mailer check-in operation. These "best practices" will serve as a roadmap to effectiveness and efficiency within the framework of election integrity.







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 12"
title: "What's at Your Workstation"
---

The tools of the mailer check-in trade include:

- A stationery supply box

- A Mailer Count worksheet: The main function of the Mailer Count worksheet is to track the number of mailers checked-in by individual staff members. At the end of the day, the team leader will compile all the checked-in totals to determine a daily grand total. It is the responsibility of every staff member to ensure that the Mailer Count worksheet is completed accurately.

- A Material Omissions Chart: The Material Omissions chart is a comprehensive, user-friendly table outlining acceptable/unacceptable standards for the review of voter statements. A material omission is a voter's failure to provide complete and correct information in his voter statement or a failure to properly submit his/her ballot. Such actions may render that ballot unqualified for counting.

 As mailer check-in staff, you are expected to make important decisions regarding the acceptance of a voter's ballot based on the information provided in the voter statement These decisions must be made fairly and consistently. If there is any question about the information in a voter statement, the answer can usually be found in the Material Omissions chart.

 However, if you are ever in doubt, ask the team leader.

- A barcode reader

- Two clear plastic collection boxes labeled "Saved in VERIS" and "Needs Cure" and a plastic tray to hold checked-in mailers. The color of the plastic tray will vary depending on how the mailers were originally received.

- A computer with VERIS access







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 13"
title: "Important Reminders"
---

Important Reminders:

- Mailer Check-In is a "one-person team" operation. Please ensure that you carefully follow all mailer check-in procedures.

2. Mailer check-in operations have eliminated one step but added another. You are no longer required to update a voter's ballot status in VERIS to "Marked" before updating the status to "Pre-Processed". Instead, you now directly change the voter's ballot status to "Pre-Processed". But just when you thought we were saving you some process time, a second step was added into the operation: the inclusion of a Bundle Number in each voter's record. We will address the how and why of this additional step later in the training.

3. Mailers are not opened and ballots are not removed from the mailers by the Check-In Team.

- An additional review of checked-in mailers is now a standard practice, completed at the end of each Mailer Check-In day. This step functions as a "double check" to ensure accurate recording in VERIS.

These changes have been instituted so that the entire CAP operation can function more efficiently. However, there is NO change to what is expected of mailer check-in staff: a compliance with operational procedures, an attention to detail, and a focus on accuracy.







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 14"
title: "Voter Submission – A Voter in an Envelope"
---

On election day, when voters arrive at their polling locations, they provide their name and address, and present identification, all before casting a ballot. Of course, the process is very different for an authorized absentee voter who is submitting a ballot by mail or in a drop box.

An authorized absentee voter who is taking advantage of the Vote By Mail option must return a voter submission that typically contains two components:

- A return mailer. The return mailer includes the Office of Elections address on the front. The voter information label and _Statement of Absentee Voter_ is on the reverse side.
- A ballot inside the return mailer.

Mailers may look different based on the status and location of the voter.

For mailer check-in staff, the return mailer is critical. The mailer represents the absentee voter. On the mailer, the voter is stating his/her name and address. In lieu of presenting identification, the voter provides a signature attesting that the information is correct.

Note that in some cases, a voter must provide additional documentation. We will discuss these specific instances later.







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 15"
title: "Domestic Ballot Return Mailer – Front Side"
---

This image is an example of the most common type of return mailer submission: the Domestic Ballot Return Mailer. The front of the mailer includes the preprinted address of the Fairfax County Office of Elections.

The voter places a completed digital ballot in the mailer. Digital ballots are pre-printed ballots on heavy stock issued by the Office of Elections that can be read by a digital scan machine.

Notice the pink circle around the plus sign. This icon represents an actual hole in the return mailer and is a tactile marker. It is used by voters that may need assistance to ensure that their ballot is sent back to the Office of Elections in the correct envelope.







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 16"
title: "Domestic Ballot Return Mailer – Reverse Side"
---

The voter information label and _Statement of Absentee Voter_ is printed on the reverse side of the return mailer.

The information on the reverse side of the return mailer is very important:

- Note the voter information label circled in red. This label contains identifying information about the authorized absentee voter, including the voter's name, address, voter ID #, and unique scannable barcode. The label also specifies the current election as well as the voter's congressional district (CD) and precinct. The label will include the letters "NA" if a Request for Assistance form must be submitted by the voter. The label will indicate "ID Required" if an acceptable form of ID must be submitted (usually by a first-time voter who has registered by mail), per Help America Vote Act (HAVA) guidelines.

- This same voter must complete the _Statement of Absentee Voter_ located beneath the label.

- Check-in staff will review the information both on the voter information label and the _Statement of Absentee Voter_ to determine if the correct authorized absentee voter has mailed in the ballot and if any material omissions are present.







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 17"
title: "Matching Label and Statement of Voter"
---

A critical mailer check-in task is to verify that the authorized absentee voter has completed the _Statement of Absentee Voter_. Therefore, it is very important that the voter's name and address on the voter information label match the information provided by the voter on the mailer.

Typically, the _Statement of Absentee Voter_ and the voter information label will contain the same voter information...but not always.

If you encounter a mismatch between the voter information label and the voter's statement, do not check-in this mailer. Place the mailer in the "Needs Cure" table box.







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 18"
title: "Evaluating Statement of Absentee Voter"
---

Once you are sure that the authorized absentee voter has completed the voter statement (i.e., the voter information label and the _Statement of Absentee Voter_ information agree), the voter statement must be reviewed for material omissions.

1. The voter statement must be filled out correctly and completely. It must contain:

- Voter's name
- Voter's address
- Voter's signature
- Witness signature

2. A date is NOT required.

If any required information is missing, place the mailer in the "Needs Cure" table box.







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 19"
title: "Acceptable Names"
---

Let's take a moment to discuss what is acceptable in the name field. To demonstrate, we will use a voter named Robert Matthew Jones. Robert Matthew Jones is the name that will appear on the voter information label.

- The voter must include the full first name and full last name. For example: Robert Jones.
 However, a voter may provide only the initial of the first name if a full middle name is included. For example: R. Matthew Jones.

- The voter may include a name in an order different from "first, middle, last". For example: Jones, Robert.

- A middle name is not required, or a middle initial may be substituted. For example: Robert M. Jones.

- A voter may provide a recognized nickname. For example: Bob Jones.

- Be cautious when generational suffixes (Jr., Sr., I, II, III) are included. Ensure that you are checking in the correct voter.

Your goal is to positively identify the voter to the best of your ability.







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 20"
title: "Acceptable Address"
---

What is an acceptable address on the voter statement?

- An address must include the voter's house/building number and the street name. An apartment or unit number is not required.
- A voter must provide the city OR the zip code.
- A voter _may not_ provide a Post Office Box (POB) or a Personal Mail Box (PMB) on _the Statement of Absentee Voter_.

If a voter has provided an address on the voter statement that is different from the address on the voter information label, place the mailer in the "Needs Cure" table box. Likewise, if a voter has provided a Post Office Box (POB) or a Personal Mailbox (PMB), place the mailer in the "Needs Cure" table box.







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 21"
title: "Request for Assistance/ID Required"
---

Some voters must include additional documentation with their ballots.

For those voters who have indicated on their absentee ballot applications that they will need assistance to complete their voter statements and/or to mark their ballots, the letters NA (Needs Assistance) will appear on the right side of the voter information label.

When reviewing the return mailer of a Needs Assistance (NA) voter, you may observe that the voter actually signed the voter statement. Perhaps this voter no longer needs assistance or the original request for the form was made in error. If the voter signed the voter statement, a Request for Assistance form is NOT required. In this case, the mailer may be checked in. You, of course, must ensure that the _Statement of Absentee Voter_ is completed correctly with no material omissions.

If assistance is requested, the voter will receive a blue "Request for Assistance" form. In most cases, a completed blue form will be returned in the mailer along with the ballot. You may not open the mailer to access this form. If you see the NA designation on a voter's information label and the voter did not sign the voter statement, do NOT process this mailer. Place the mailer in the "Needs Cure" table box.

In federal elections, some voters, usually first time voters who have registered by mail but did not include an acceptable form of identification with their registration, must submit this documentation with their ballots. Their voter information label indicates "ID Required". If you see the "ID Required" designation on a voter's information label, do not open the mailer to examine the ID. Instead, place the mailer in the "Needs Cure" table box.







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 22"
title: "Cured Voter Submissions"
---

Virginia state law offers an absentee voter the opportunity to correct a material omission on the voter statement. If a voter has provided incorrect or incomplete information on the voter statement that would cause the ballot to be disallowed, the Office of Elections will notify the voter of the material omission and further stipulate how to correct the issue so the ballot may be counted. This is called the "curing" process.

Some absentee voters may opt to come, in person, to the Office of Elections to "cure" their submission.

Others may choose to provide (by mail or email), a signed affidavit containing the corrected information. When this affidavit arrives at the Office of Elections it will be placed with the voter's original mailer. In this case, you may review the information in the affidavit for material omissions and use the affidavit information to check in the voter on VERIS.

Note that it may be necessary to review the affidavit in conjunction with the original voter statement. For example, if the voter forgot the city or zip code on the original voter statement and then submitted an affidavit with only the corrected city or zip code, you may look at both components to determine completeness.







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 23"
title: "Other Types of Mailers"
---

As noted previously, a digital ballot enclosed in a domestic return mailer is the most common voter submission.

However, during operations, you will encounter various other types of mailers. It is important that you familiarize yourself with all the different types of voter submissions. There are different requirements and mailer check-in procedures relevant to each type.







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 24"
title: "UOCAVA Return Mailer – Front Side"
---

The image shows the front side of a UOCAVA return mailer. UOCAVA stands for Uniformed and Overseas Citizens Absentee Voting Act. The UOCAVA return mailer will contain a standard digital ballot.

A UOCAVA submission is sent to the Office of Elections by an authorized absentee voter who is living overseas or by military personnel living anywhere.

Note that the front of a UOCAVA mailer looks similar to the front of a standard domestic mailer. The reverse side of the UOCAVA mailer looks very different.







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 25"
title: "UOCAVA Return Mailer – Reverse Side"
---

The reverse side of a UOCAVA mailer includes the voter information label and the voter statement, just as on the domestic mailer; however, the _Statement of UOCAVA Absentee Voter_ is very different.

No address is required. No date is required. In fact, the voter does not even have to provide a printed name.

What is required? Only the voter's signature and the signature of a witness. If either of these two signatures is missing, the mailer cannot be checked in. Place the mailer in the "Needs Cure" table box.







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 26"
title: "Email Ballot Return Mailer"
---

Voters living overseas may request a ballot file be emailed to them. The voters print their ballots and the return envelope templates and send back the hard copies by regular mail.

Voters may choose to tape the return envelope template containing the address of the Office of Elections to their own envelopes or may use their own envelope addressed by hand.







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 27"
title: "Email Ballot Return Mailer – Reverse Side"
---

An email voter must complete the same Statement of Absentee Voter as other UOCAVA voters and is subject to the same set of material omissions. No address is required. No date is required. The voter does not even have to provide a printed name.

However, the signatures of the voter and a witness are required. If either of the two signatures is missing, the mailer cannot be checked in. Place the mailer in the "Needs Cure" table box.

The voter statement is typically taped to the back of the return mailer; the voter's name is readily accessible and can be used to find and update the voter's record in VERIS. However, if a voter encloses the voter statement inside the return mailer, place the mailer in the Needs Cure table box. As is standard practice, you may not open the mailer to examine the voter statement.

And one more thing: be prepared for many different sizes of return mailers with lots of tape!







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 28"
title: "Unused/FWABs/Voids"
---

The Office of Elections staff reviews and sorts mailers as they arrive at the Government Center. They attach an appropriate sticker and set aside any unused voter packets, Federal Write-in Absentee Ballots (FWABs), and voided mailers. Typically, these will not be seen by the mailer check-in staff.

However, if one slips into one of your trays of mailers, give it to the team leader. Do not attempt to find this voter in VERIS or to check-in the ballot.







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 29"
title: "Mailer Check-In Operations: The Big Picture"
---

The previous slides have presented the background knowledge required for mailer check-in. You have a great foundation and now it's time to put all those building blocks together.







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 30"
title: "Mailer Check-In: The Big Picture"
---

The above image displays "The Big Picture". It describes the general flow of the mailer check-in operation. In other words, what you do and when you do it!

Please take a moment to review this information.

Each piece of "The Big Picture" incorporates steps that must be followed precisely and deliberately. As we discuss the details of mailer check-in, always keep in mind that commitment to the integrity of this process is essential. All voter submissions must be evaluated consistently and impartially.







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 31"
title: "Mailer Check-In Fundamentals"
---

The following slides incorporate all the steps, **in detail**, that will occur when mailer check-in is taking place.

But, before we start, just a word of encouragement. Hang in there! At the outset, it seems like a lot of steps, but it will all come together. And after a short time of hands-on experience, you will be an expert!







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 32"
title: "VERIS: What is it?"
---

To begin, let's discuss VERIS.

The Virginia Election and Registration Information System (VERIS) is a database that contains highly sensitive information about all registered voters throughout the state of Virginia. As such, it is crucial that this information be protected and not shared with others who do not have a need to know. VERIS voter data is only to be used in CAP in the execution of your role as a member of the mailer check-in staff.

FYI: When accessing and using the VERIS system you will be asked to consent to system monitoring for law enforcement and other purposes. Unauthorized use of this computer system may subject you to State or Federal criminal prosecution and penalties.







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 33"
title: "VERIS: Access"
---

In order to access the VERIS database, you must first log into Fairfax County using your county logon credentials. Once you are logged into Fairfax County, click the VERIS icon on the desktop and then sign into VERIS, using your VERIS logon credentials.

Please note: It is important to remember both your Fairfax County username/password as well as your VERIS username/password. Do not confuse these!

For security, do not leave your computer unattended. If you need to step away from the computer, be sure to log out. Likewise, at the end of your shift, log out of VERIS and sign out of the Fairfax County network.







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 34"
title: "VERIS: Batch Scanning"
---

VERIS can be used to track the status of a voter's ballot as it winds its way through the absentee ballot process. After a voter's absentee voting application has been processed, VERIS indicates that a ballot has been "Issued". The voter marks the ballot and returns it to the Office of Elections. When the ballot is received at the Office of Elections, the Mailer Check-In team determines if the correct authorized absentee voter completed the voter statement AND if any material omissions are present. Once the mailer is "qualified" by the Check-In staff, the ballot status is updated to "Pre-Processed" in VERIS.

There are two ways to update a ballot status in VERIS depending on whether there is a scannable barcode on the voter's information label.

We are going to begin our discussion with the **batch scanning** method. Batch scanning is used when your set of mailers all have scannable bar codes, typically domestic digital/UOCAVA submissions. This is the method you will use most often. If done properly, batch scanning is very efficient.

To begin batch scanning, log into VERIS and land on the VERIS home page. Place the cursor over "Absentee" on the navigation bar. Then select "AB Batch Receipt – without IDs" from the drop-down menu.







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 35"
title: "VERIS: Date and Method or Receipt"
---

Once you've clicked on "All batch receipt-without IDs", the _Date Received_ and _Received by Method_ fields should appear. _Date Received_ defaults to the current date. The date must be changed to indicate the date the mailer was received at the elections office. The date can be changed by clicking on the calendar icon to the right of the date received box. For example, if you're checking in mail received earlier in the week, use the calendar icon to the right of the box and click on the appropriate date.

For the _Received by Method_, click on the arrow to the right of the box to select the appropriate method of receipt. If scanning mailers delivered by USPS, FEDEX, DHL or UPS select "Mail". If scanning drop box return mailers, select "Drop-off".

Make sure to select the appropriate _Received by Method_ based on whether the return mailers were received by mail or from voter drop box locations. If you are unsure, check with the team leader.







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 36"
title: "Helpful Hints"
---

It is very important that the "Date Received" and "Received by Method" are entered correctly in VERIS.

Members of our ingenious Mail Receipt team have created an organized system to help us maintain accuracy. This entails using different colored trays based on method of receipt and labeling each tray with a specific designator that includes the received date.

Note the colors of the trays. A red tray contains mailers with digital ballots, both domestic and UOCAVA, that arrived by mail. A gray tray holds mailers with digital ballots that were returned by drop box. A blue tray contains mailers from voters who requested email ballots.

Note the label attached to the front of each tray. The label indicates the bundle number. The bundle number always starts with the received by date and includes the tray number.

These bundle numbers help track the ballots through the workflow of receipt, check-in, and pre-processing (ballot extraction and scanning).







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 37"
title: "Helpful Hints"
---

The terminology used to describe groupings of mailers as they move through the absentee ballot process can be confusing.

For clarification:

One tray contains one bundle of mailers.

One bundle (tray) contains mailers pre-banded into sets. A full bundle (tray) will contain approximately 6 sets of mailers.

One set contains fifty mailers pre-banded together. A full bundle (tray) containing 6 sets of mailers will contain approximately 300 mailers.

One group = ten mailers. During the check-in process, mailers are scanned in groups of 10.







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 38"
title: "Mailers with Barcodes – Operation Details"
---

You are ready to begin the actual operation...finally!

Step 1. Ensure that you have accessed the correct VERIS screen; you will see the _Received Date_ and the _Received By Method_ fields on the screen.

Step 2. The team leader provides a red or gray tray containing unopened digital domestic and/or UOCAVA return mailers, all with scannable barcodes. All the mailers in the tray have been received on the same date and by the same method. Look for the bundle number on the front of the tray. Change the _Received Date_ and _Received by Method_ on the VERIS screen, if necessary, to correlate with the bundle number and color of tray.







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 39"
title: "Mailers with Barcodes – Operation Details"
---

Step 3. Immediately transfer the bundle number label to the front of a green tray. This step is very important. The checked-in mailers from the original tray must all stay together in one green tray with the same bundle number. Also write the bundle number on the Mailer Count Worksheet.

Step 4. Remove a set of banded mailers from the red tray. Quickly "eyeball" each mailer in the set and remove any email ballots (because these do not have scannable bar codes) and any Unused mailers. Give these to the Team Leader. After removing any mis-sorted mailers, count the remaining mailers in the set. Place this number in the Mailers at Start column on the Mailer Count Worksheet.







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 40"
title: "Mailers with Barcodes – Operation Details"
---

Step 5. You must now meticulously evaluate each mailer to determine if the correct authorized absentee voter sent in the ballot AND to determine if the voter statement contains any material omissions. To accomplish this:

a. Compare the name and address on the _Statement of Absentee Voter_ to the name and address on the voter information label. This includes generational suffixes. Place any mismatches in the "Needs Cure" table box.

b. Examine the voter statement for material omissions. If material omissions are present, place the mailer in the "Needs Cure" table box.

- Review voter information label for special circumstances: Needs Assistance (NA) or ID Required.

Does the voter information label indicate Needs Assistance ("NA")? The mailer may include a blue Request for Assistance form. Remember, you may not open the mailer to check for the blue form; however, you may see the blue form through the hole in the return mailer.

- If the voter signed the voter statement and the voter statement contains no material omissions, the mailer may be checked-in.
- If the information label indicates "NA", and the voter has not provided a signature, place mailer in the "Needs Cure" table box.

Does the voter information label indicate "ID Required"?

- Place mailer in the "Needs Cure" table box.

To expedite the curing process, write the reason(s) why each mailer is sent for curing. For example, if the _Statement of Absentee Voter_ did not include the voter's printed name, write "name", _in pencil_, in the upper right-hand corner of the mailer, above the voter's statement. Appropriate labels include name, address, signature, witness, blank (if the voter's statement includes no information), NA (Needs Assistance), and ID Required.







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 41"
title: "Mailers with Barcodes – Operation Details"
---

Now you have a set of approximately 50 mailers in front of you. You have verified that the information label matches the voter statement **and** you have determined that the voter statement is complete (with no material omissions) on each of the mailers.

Divide this set of 50 mailers into 5 groups of 10 mailers. You will work with one group at a time. Note: If you have placed any mailers in the "Needs Cure" table box, the last group may contain less than 10 mailers.

Now let the scanning begin!

Step 6. Select the first group of 10 mailers. Select the first mailer in that group and scan the barcode on the voter information label.

Some important scanning particulars:

- Position the head of the scanner level and close to the table.
- Be sure to only take hold of one mailer at a time and carefully slide the mailer under the scanner beam. Listen for a "success" beep.
- Then, cautiously remove the mailer out from under the scanner beam. Overly hurried, random movements often cause a mailer to be re-scanned by mistake. You do not want to hear a second beep! Take your time...scan mailers carefully and deliberately.







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 42"
title: "Mailers with Barcodes – Operation Details"
---

After scanning the barcode, you will hear a "beep". The beep indicates that the barcode has been successfully scanned. The voter's name will appear in the name field. The _Status_ indicates "Marked" and the _Status Reason_ indicates "Ballot Returned". If you do not see the correct voter's name or the status/reason fields indicate anything other than "Marked" and "Ballot Returned", call the team leader.

Step 7. Verify voter's name on the VERIS screen. Have you located the correct voter?

Step 8. Confirm ballot status reads "Marked". A "Marked" status indicates that the voter's ballot has been received at the Office of Elections.

Step 9. Place the scanned mailer, facedown. By doing so, you will keep the scanned mailers separated from those awaiting scanning.







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 43"
title: "Mailers with Barcodes – Operation Details"
---

Step 10. Continue scanning. The list of voters on the screen will grow longer each time a new mailer is scanned. Each time you scan, listen closely for a "beep". Verify that the name on the mailer is the same name that appears on the VERIS screen, that the ballot _Status_ is "Marked", and that the _Status Reason_ is "Ballot Returned".

Once scanned, place each mailer, facedown, in the separated pile.

VERIS is programmed to allow a group of 10 mailers to be scanned at one time. After you have successfully scanned this group of 10 mailers, take one more look at the VERIS screen to reconfirm:

- The count in the upper right corner shows 10
- _Status_ shows "Marked" for all voters
- _Status Reason_ shows "Ballot Returned" for all voters.

Step 11. Remain on this screen. Change each voter's ballot status to _Pre-Processed,_ using the arrows to access the dropdown menu.

Step 12. Locate the _Status Reason_ column, indicating "Ballot Returned" for all voters. Replace "Ballot Returned" with the correct bundle number (indicated on the tray label) for each voter. (Hint: Type the bundle number for the first voter, then use the copy/paste function for the following nine voters.) This will mean a bit more work for the Check-In Team but will save hours of time for staff members taxed with finding a mailer from a specific voter.

**Problems?**

**Immediately notify the team leader if any mailer will not scan or an error message pops up on the computer.**







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 44"
title: "Mailers with Barcodes – Operation Details"
---

Step 13. Verify that each voter's status indicates "Pre-Processed". Verify that the correct bundle number appears in the _Status Reason_ field for each voter.

Step 14. **CLICK SAVE** at the bottom left-hand corner of the page. This is a critical step. Then, place the 10 scanned mailers in the "Saved in VERIS" table box.

Step 15. Continue process until all mailers in set have been scanned. Remember to scan one group of 10 mailers at a time and be sure to click "Save" at the end of each group.

As each group of 10 mailers is successfully checked-in and saved in VERIS, place the group in the "Saved in VERIS" table box. When you complete the entire set, you will have mailers from approximately 50 absentee voters in the table box. The status of every one of these voters is now "Pre-Processed".







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 45"
title: "FYI: Why Only 10?"
---

Why only 10?

Occasionally, during batch scanning, a "First Tuesday" server error message will pop up. This screen indicates that one or more mailers in the group just scanned may not have been saved in the database.

If this screen appears, the entire group of 10 mailers must be re-scanned.

The "No More Than 10 Rule" was instituted to minimize the amount of time spent on re-scanning.

And a word of warning! VERIS can be an unpredictable creature! It can be slow or even unavailable at times. Patience and flexibility will go a long way in helping you accomplish your job.







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 46"
title: "Mailers with Barcodes – Operation Details"
---

Step 16. Remove the checked-in mailers from the "Saved in VERIS" table box. Place a green checkmark on the reverse side of every mailer (the voter statement side). The green check mark indicates that the process is complete. Now put a rubberband around the set of checked-in mailers and place the set in the green tray containing completed bundles.







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 47"
title: "Mailers with Barcodes – Operation Details"
---

Step 17. Almost done! Your last task is to complete the Mailer Count worksheet to account for both the checked-in mailers and "Needs Cure" mailers.

- Count the number of domestic checked-in mailers. Record this number in the _Checked-in Domestic Mailers_ column for Set 1. If you have checked-in UOCAVA voters, be sure to record this number in the appropriate column.

- When you were evaluating the voter statement for material omissions, did you place any mailers in the "Needs Cure" table box? Record this number in the _Needs Cure Mailers_ column for Set 1.

The number of checked-in mailers + the number of needs cure mailers = the number of mailers at start. (We hope!) These numbers must reconcile.

When reconciliation is complete, attach a "Needs Cure" wrap to the mailers that will be sent to curing. Ensure that each mailer has been labeled with a "reason" for curing. On the wrap, write the Bundle #, Set # and total number of mailers included within the wrap. Leave these mailers in the "Needs Cure" table box.







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 48"
title: "Mailers with Barcodes – Not the End!"
---

Congratulations! You have successfully completed checking-in your first set of mailers with barcodes. That was easy...right?

But you're not done yet. Grab another set of 50 mailers and let's do it again.







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 49"
title: "Checking-in Mailers Without Barcodes"
---

You will not always be able to use the "Batch Scanning"method to scan mailers and check voters into VERIS; for example, when receiving a mailer from a voter who has requested an email ballot.

As you have already learned, a voter living overseas or military personnel living anywhere may request to receive their ballot by email. The voter uses templates in a PDF attachment to create their ballot and their return mailer. Once printed, the voted ballot must be inserted into a return mailer and mailed back to the Office of Elections.

This mailer does **not** have a preprinted voter information label with a barcode. You will need to check this voter into VERIS manually.

The majority of these mailers will arrive at your workstation in a blue tray. The bundle number at the front of the tray will include the letter "E" to designate email.







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 50"
title: "Mailers without Barcodes – Operation Details"
---

To process a mailer manually, log into VERIS and land on the VERIS home page. Place the cursor over "Absentee" on the navigation bar. Then select "Absentee Search" from the dropdown menu.







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 51"
title: "Mailers without Barcodes – Operation Details"
---

The Voter Search page will appear on the screen.

Type in the voter's last and first name. Select "Search" in the lower left-hand corner.

Search results will appear at the bottom of the page. Find and select the correct voter.







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 52"
title: "Mailers without Barcodes – Operation Details"
---

Once you select the correct voter from the search list, the Voter Overview page appears.

Verify that you have located the correct voter by comparing the name on the voter statement with the information on the VERIS screen. Do they match?

Do you have the correct election? The screen should display "2022 November General Election". If the current election does not show, click on the drop-down arrow in the "Election" field and select the correct election.

Then ask yourself, was the voter issued an absentee ballot? If yes, _Status_ will indicate "Issued". If the _Status_ does not say "Issued", notify the team leader.

When you have confirmed that the information is correct, click on the pencil icon at the lower right of the screen, next to the "Issued" status. This will allow you to edit the voter's record to show that the voter's ballot was received.







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 53"
title: "Mailers without Barcodes – Operation Details"
---

The left side of this slide shows the items that need to be edited and verified. We must ensure VERIS reflects the correct information for the voter.

- Confirm the _Ballot Received Date_ is the same as the date indicated on the tray label. If not, adjust the date by clicking on the calendar icon.

- The _Received by Method_ field defaults to "Mail" which means the return mailer was delivered by the post office or a commercial mail delivery service (UPS, FEDEX, DHL). If the return mailer was received from a voter drop off location, _Received by Method_ should be changed to "Drop Off".

- Change the _Status_ from "Issued" to "Pre-Processed".

- Add the bundle number into the _Ballot Status Comment_ field.

- Click save. VERIS will then return you to the voter's overview page which will reflect the changed ballot status.







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 54"
title: "Mailers without Barcodes – Operation Details"
---

After selecting "Save", this confirmation screen will appear. Ensure that the status is "Pre-Processed". Ensure the correct bundle number appears in the _Status Reason_ field.

Place a green check mark on the reverse side of the mailer to indicate that the voter's ballot status has been updated to "Pre-Processed".

And you're done with the first mailer.

To begin checking-in another mailer, hover your mouse over "Absentee" in the navigation bar at the top of the VERIS home page. Select "Absentee Search" to locate the next voter's VERIS record.







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 55"
title: "Mini-Review"
---

Let's take a moment for a quick review.







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 56"
title: "Mini-Review"
---

- What are the two basic components of a voter's submission? A return mailer and a ballot

- Is a witness signature required on the _Statement of Absentee Voter_ for the November 2022 general election? Yes

- If the name on the _Statement of Absentee Voter_ is different from the name on the voter information label, what do you do? Check the Material Omissions chart to determine if the variation is acceptable. (For example: Bob for Robert) If the difference is unacceptable per the Material Omissions chart, place mailer in the "Needs Cure" table box.

- What are some examples of 'material omissions' on a _Statement of Absentee Voter_? No name, no or incomplete address, missing voter or witness signature

- Are you opening mailers and removing ballots during mailer check-in operations? No







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 57"
title: "Mini-Review (continued)"
---

- What two important components appear on the reverse side of a return mailer? A voter information label and the _Statement of Absentee Voter_

- You will require two sets of logon credentials. What are they? Fairfax County and VERIS

- Can batch scanning be used for email ballots? No, batch scanning requires a scannable barcode. Email ballot mailers do not have barcodes.

9. What information must be placed in the Status Reason field for each checked-in voter? Bundle Number

10. When completing the Mailer Count worksheet, what numbers must be recorded? The number of mailers at start, the number of checked-in mailers, and the number of needs cure mailers.







---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 58"
title: "Congratulations!"
---

Congratulations! You have completed the online class for Mailer Check-In.

If you have any questions, don't hesitate to call us at 703-324-4711/4742 or email us at CentralAbsentee@fairfaxcounty.gov.

Thank you.