---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 43"
title: "Mailers with Barcodes – Operation Details"
---

Step 10. Continue scanning. The list of voters on the screen will grow longer each time a new mailer is scanned. Each time you scan, listen closely for a "beep". Verify that the name on the mailer is the same name that appears on the VERIS screen, that the ballot _Status_ is "Marked", and that the _Status Reason_ is "Ballot Returned".

Once scanned, place each mailer, facedown, in the separated pile.

VERIS is programmed to allow a group of 10 mailers to be scanned at one time. After you have successfully scanned this group of 10 mailers, take one more look at the VERIS screen to reconfirm:

- The count in the upper right corner shows 10
- _Status_ shows "Marked" for all voters
- _Status Reason_ shows "Ballot Returned" for all voters.

Step 11. Remain on this screen. Change each voter's ballot status to _Pre-Processed,_ using the arrows to access the dropdown menu.

Step 12. Locate the _Status Reason_ column, indicating "Ballot Returned" for all voters. Replace "Ballot Returned" with the correct bundle number (indicated on the tray label) for each voter. (Hint: Type the bundle number for the first voter, then use the copy/paste function for the following nine voters.) This will mean a bit more work for the Check-In Team but will save hours of time for staff members taxed with finding a mailer from a specific voter.

**Problems?**

**Immediately notify the team leader if any mailer will not scan or an error message pops up on the computer.**
