---
section: ""
title: "Slide 3"
title: "At the Office of Elections..."
layout: slide
---

Now that the return mailer has been received at the office of elections, its real journey begins. Within the office, the return mailer (with its enclosed absentee ballot) will be categorized, counted, date stamped, bundled, and a tracking log created as part of the Mail Receipt process. From there, the mailers move on to the next operation, which is Mail Check-in. This team is responsible for updating the return mailer's status in Virginia's statewide voter database, whish is known as VERIS. During that process, the mailer status transitions from "issued" (which is an absentee ballot sent to voter), to "pre-processed" (which means the absentee ballot has been returned, Statement of Absentee Voter completed, with required signatures included). Once the Mail Check-in process has been completed, the return mailers cycle forward to Extraction team leads who organize the return mailers for pre-processing.

The first step in preparing the now bundled return mailers is to have them made into "batches". Batching is the process of combining the bundled return mailers into larger groups which average between 700-900 mailers. When the batch is created, a ballot batch tracking log is generated. The original bundle logs, prepared when the return mailer was first received in the office, are attached to the newly created ballot batch tracking log. The batch log (with the associated bundle logs attached) remains with that batch of return mailers throughout the rest of the processing cycle.

The batched return mailers are now ready for the next step, which is Pre-Processing Phase One, the actual Opening and Extraction.
