---
section: "BASIC INFORMATION"
title: "Slide 4"
title: "Election Officer Basics"
layout: slide
---

**WORKING HOURS:** Election officers should be inside the polling place and ready to go by 5:00 AM. The day ends when all work is complete & you are released by the Chief. Voting ends at 7:00 PM and it takes most precincts 1-2 hours to finish closing the polling place.

**COMPENSATION:** You are paid <span>&#36;</span>175 for a full day of service. Officers who arrive late (after 5:00 AM) may be penalized <span>&#36;</span>25 or dismissed immediately. We strongly encourage you to set multiple alarms so this doesn't happen!

**WHAT TO BRING:** You should bring all food, medicine, and reading material you need for the day. Note that reading material may not be politically-oriented, such as a newspaper. You may bring electronic devices such as a phone or tablet, but you may not use them while assisting voters.

**WHAT TO WEAR:** Dress should be business casual. Clean, unripped jeans are acceptable. The temperature can vary at polling places and it can change during the day, so wear layers! Of course, clothing should not be politically-oriented or offensive in nature. And wear comfortable shoes; it's a long day!

**DURING THE DAY:** You may not comment on candidates or political issues, current or past. It's very important to note that you can't leave the polling place premises during the day, so again, make sure to bring everything you need with you for the day. You can, of course, go get something from your car or have a friend or family member drop off items to you.

