---
section: ""
title: "Slide 41"
title: ""
layout: slide
videoID: "tUPArvp3OG4"
slug: "041"
---

Poll Pad check-in video here.


First, the Poll Pad always begins on the home screen.

-

When you tap "Get Started" on the Poll Pad's home screen, it brings you to this screen.

You can tap "Scan Barcode" to scan a voter's driver's license. This is how you will check in most voters.

You can tap "Manual Entry" to search for a voter by name. This is how you will check in voters who present a valid form of ID that is not a driver's license.

-

If you cannot scan a voter's ID, you will need to search for them manually. When doing a "Manual Entry," always search for 2 letters of the voter's last name and 1 letter of the voter's first name. If you type more than this, it will take longer and lead to more mistakes. It is okay to leave the address field blank!

When the list of voters is displayed, tap on the name of the voter whom you are checking in. Be careful not to select the wrong person, such as John Smith Jr. instead of John Smith Sr.

-

If you cannot find a voter by name, try searching for them by their house number and street name. Tap 'Search' when you are ready for results.

-

When you select a voter to check in, you will need to advance through TWO screens.

First, you will be presented with their voter information. If there are no restrictive codes or warning messages, repeat only the voter's name in an audible voice and check in the voter by touching "Accept."

-

Second, you will then be taken to this page, where you will be presented with multiple possible check-in "flags." We will explain these flags shortly.

This is also the final opportunity to confirm you are checking in the right voter.

When you're ready, press the "Submit" button.

-

When you press "Submit" to officially check in a voter, you will be presented with this screen. Wait about 3 seconds for the Poll Pad to automatically return to the home screen.

Congratulations, you've now checked in a voter!

