---
section: "CONCLUSION"
title: "Slide 67"
title: "Updates from November 2021 Election"
layout: slide
---

Before you go, we want to bring your attention to some notable updates from the last election. 

With each election, we look for ways to update our procedures in order to improve the security, accuracy, and transparency of the election process.

**Updates from the November 2021 Election:**

- Fairfax County moved away from using iSync drives to manually update the voter data file on each Poll Pad. We are now able to complete this process wirelessly with the secure election database. This allows us to have the most up-to-date voter data file and setup more efficiently on election morning.

- Curbside procedures remain largely the same for when a voter needs to vote from their car. However, now officers may transport the poll pad outside to complete the check in process in front of the voter.

- In the past, precincts would receive loose ballots that would need to be inventoried several times a day. Now ballots are sent to precincts in a pad, much like a robust legal pad. Ballots should be ripped off the pad when being issued to the voter, not before. The stub remains on the pad and does the counting for you, making it very easy to account for the number of ballots used.

- If you served prior to November 2021, you are likely familiar with spoiled and void ballots. A ballot is marked spoiled if a voter makes a mistake and wishes to exchange the ballot, whereas a ballot is marked void if the voter leaves and the ballot cannot be cast. A voter may also wish to exchange their mailed absentee ballot at a precinct. In the past, we would designate these as spoiled ballots, as it is another type of exchange. Since November 2021, we now mark these ballots as 'absentee surrendered' to distinguish from other types of spoiled ballots.