---
section: "STATEMENT OF RESULTS"
title: "Slide 49"
title: "Example SOR, Part 1"
layout: slide
---

Here is an example SOR. On the right side, you must staple the tapes printed from your DS200 scanner.

Note that in each section of the SOR, there is a column for what number you are looking for (e.g. Total Voters Checked In), then a column telling you where to find that number (e.g. Poll Pad Certification Form), and then a column for you to write in the number (e.g. 102). Once you get the hang of it, it's pretty straightforward. There are also more detailed instructions in the Chiefs Notebook that you receive each election.

- **Part A:** In this first section, you will account for all voters in your precinct. In this example SOR, we can see on row A1 that 102 voters were checked-in on the Poll Pads. Next, on row A2, we have to account for any fleeing voters. As a reminder, fleeing voters are individuals who checked in and received a ballot, but left without scanning it on the DS200. In this example, we can see there were 2 fleeing voters. Lastly, on row A3, we want to calculate the difference (A1 minus A2), which tells us there were 100 voters who actually cast their ballot.

- **Part B:** In the second section, you will account for all counted ballots in your precinct. In this example, we can see that there were 50 ballots cast on the first DS200 scanner, 50 ballots cast on the second DS200 scanner, and 0 hand-counted ballots. If you add these numbers up, you can see there were 100 total counted ballots.

- **Part C:** In this section, you will note any discrepancies in your numbers. In our example, the total number of voters casting ballots in Part A matched the total number of ballots cast in Part B, which is great! That is what is supposed to happen, which is why we wrote "no discrepancies." However, sometimes the numbers may not match up. The most common issue is if a voter was not properly checked-in but still received a ballot. This is why it's important to monitor your check-in table first thing in the morning and make sure all officers know how to check-in voters properly. In that case, if you know why the numbers are off, write an explanation here.

One other note: if any numbers are 0, we prefer you put a "dash" in that box, as we did here in section B (row B3). It makes it a little easier when office staff review every SOR in the days after the election.

