
---
layout: slide
title: "PPE Slide 1"
---

Welcome to the **PPE Specialist** online training class!

This class will go over everything you need to know to be a PPE (Personal Protective Equipment) Specialist for the November 2020 General and Special Elections.

---
layout: slide
title: "PPE Slide 2"
---

First, we will provide an overview of this class.

---
layout: slide
title: "PPE Slide 3"
---

Review all information in these slides and notes at your own pace.

We will go over a number of topics, including: PPE supplies, what to do before election day, what to do during election day, what to do if someone appears ill, and how to return PPE supplies as part of the closing procedures.

At the end of this training, you must complete a quiz to receive credit.

---
layout: slide
title: "PPE Slide 4"
---

Before we get into our training, here is a message from the Election Manager:

&quot;It is our responsibility to provide each eligible voter in Fairfax County with the opportunity to exercise their right to vote in an efficient and equitable manner. The Fairfax County Electoral Board, the Director of Elections, the hard-working staff in the Office of Elections, and our team of dedicated Election Officers continually strive to provide voters with outstanding customer service, well-run polling places, accurate results, and an excellent voting process. In these difficult times, as we navigate uncharted waters, we will continually strive to maintain these high standards while also implementing a comprehensive plan to protect Election Officers, voters, political observers, county support staff, representatives at our polling place facilities, and any other individuals involved in the election process.

In March 2020, we began working with county staff, health professionals, and the State Department of Elections to enact every feasible contingency measure to combat COVID-19 at our polling places while also maintaining the integrity of the election process. As a result of these actions; detailed training; and successful communication and feedback between our dedicated staff and Election Officers, we were successful in our efforts to maintain the very high standards that Fairfax County residents expect and deserve.

For the November 2020 Presidential Election, we will expand the successful measures that we implemented for the June 2020 Primary Elections, which were well received by more than 95 percent of our Election Officers according to a post-election survey. In addition, we will provide a dedicated PPE Specialist; additional PPE supplies and materials including acrylic sneeze guards for check-in stations, the ballot table, and the Chief&#39;s table; disinfectant/sanitizing wipes; and additional social distancing signs and arrows in an effort to further improve and enhance our Contingency Response Plan for COVID-19.

Although we will do our best to prepare and implement a thorough and comprehensive Contingency Response Plan, issues may arise that we have not foreseen, or you may have questions that we have not answered. In that case, please feel free to contact Election Administration staff at 703-324-4735 with any questions or concerns. We are in this together and I am confident that we will succeed. I welcome your feedback and appreciate your hard work and dedication.&quot;

This message was from our Election Manager, Eric Spicer.

---
layout: slide
title: "PPE Slide 5"
---

What measures are we taking before election day?

- We have strongly encouraged voters to vote absentee, whether by voting early in-person, requesting a mailed absentee ballot, or using absentee ballot drop-off boxes.
- We are strongly encouraging voters at polling places to wear face coverings, including posting signs at all polling places.
- We have recruited many election officers to be able to fully staff all polling places.
- We are providing all election officer training and briefings online.
- We are directing election officers to stay home if they are ill.
- And, we are informing election officers about PPE requirements.

---
layout: slide
title: "PPE Slide 6"
---

Thank you for agreeing to be a PPE Specialist! We really appreciate your help serving in this important role.

What are your duties as PPE Specialist?

- Before election day:
- Read the Contingency Response Plan for Polling Place Operations During COVID-19.
- Help prepare voting room for social distancing.
- Ensure all individuals maintain proper social distancing.
- Ensure that all Election Officers and Poll Watchers wear face masks or face shields.
- Sanitize voting booths and other surfaces regularly.
- Ensure the Contingency Response Plan for Polling Place Operations During COVID-19 is being followed in the polling place.
- Answer questions from voters relating to our Contingency Response Plan for Polling Place Operations During COVID-19.
- Ensure PPE materials are properly returned.

---
layout: slide
title: "PPE Slide 7"
---

We will now go over the PPE Supplies that we will provide to each precinct.

---
layout: slide
title: "PPE Slide 8"
---

Each precinct will receive additional resources for this election. Your Chief will pick these up before election day and have them available when you setup the polling place.

Let&#39;s start with the PPE Kit. Each PPE Kit contains:

- **Face Masks** – 3 for each Election Officer.
- **Face Shields** – 1 for each Election Officer.
- **Gloves** – for Officers at the check-in stations, ballot table, and Chief&#39;s table.
- **75% Alcohol Moist Wipes** – for cleaning the Poll Pads, the ExpressVotes, and the DS200 voting machines, and other surfaces
- **Spray Disinfectant** and paper towels to clean voting surfaces throughout the day.
- **Hand Sanitizer** for Election Officers to use throughout the day.
- **Hand Sanitizer** for voters to use just before they leave the polling place.

---
layout: slide
title: "PPE Slide 9"
---

In addition to the supplies in the PPE Kit, each precinct will receive materials to help enforce Social Distancing, including:

- **Social Distancing &quot;Welcome&quot; Signs** that have been prepared by Fairfax County with the county seal at the top of sign.
- **Social Distancing Signs** prepared by staff in the Office of Elections.
- **Social Distancing Round Floor Markings** (to be taped to large cones at Schools or taped to the floor with blue &quot;painter&#39;s&quot; tape).
- **Yellow Directional Arrows** to help with social distancing.

---
layout: slide
title: "PPE Slide 10"
---

Each precinct will also receive 8 clear **Acrylic Sneeze Guards** to be placed at the Check-In tables, Ballot Table, Chief&#39;s Table, and other areas. Note that there is a cutout at the bottom to allow voters and officers to easily exchange materials (e.g. voter&#39;s ID, ballots, etc.).

NOTE: The sneeze guards you receive will be completely transparent after you remove the protective cover. However, in this picture, we have added blue tape to the edges of the acrylic sneeze guard so you can see it better.

---
layout: slide
title: "PPE Slide 11"
---

We&#39;re almost done going over all the additional resources. Finally, you will receive:

- **Single-use pens**
- **Single-use privacy folders**
- **Trash bags** for used face coverings, gloves, and single-use privacy folders.
- **Wide blue &quot;painter&#39;s&quot; Tape** to be used in addition to Social Distancing Round Floor Markings, if necessary.

---
layout: slide
title: "PPE Slide 12"
---

We will now go over how to set up your polling place before Election Day.

---
layout: slide
title: "PPE Slide 13"
---

You should coordinate with your Chief and assist in setting up the voting room before election day.

Post Social Distancing signs and markings throughout the voting room. This will give all officers more time on election morning and will be a good opportunity to familiarize yourself with your polling place.

Place an extra table in front of the Check-In Tables, Ballot Table, and Chief&#39;s Table to enforce proper social distancing.

Assemble acrylic sneeze guards before election day.

---
layout: slide
title: "PPE Slide 14"
---

Let&#39;s start with where to put the signs we reviewed earlier.

We will provide you with two laminated copies of the social distancing signs with the county seal. Post these signs at the entrance to the voting room.

---
layout: slide
title: "PPE Slide 15"
---

We will provide you with 6 copies of a yellow 6-foot Social Distancing sign and 6 copies of a blue and white Social Distancing sign. You should post these signs at the following locations:

- The entrance to the polling place (building)
- The entrance to the voting room
- Check-in tables
- Voting Booth area and Voting Machine area

---
layout: slide
title: "PPE Slide 16"
---

Lastly, we will provide you with 15 Round Blue Social Distancing Signs to place on the floor in 6-foot intervals. If your voting room is in a School, School Staff will provide you with large cones and you should tape the Round Blue Social Distancing Signs to the cones and place them in 6-foot intervals. In other locations you can use blue painter&#39;s tape to **tape** the signs to the floor.

**IMPORTANT: Do not affix the round signs directly to the floor. Tape them to the cones or the floor.**

You can use the tape in addition (if necessary) to mark X&#39;s on the floor in 6-Foot Intervals.

Place Round Signs and/or wide blue &quot;painter&#39;s tape&quot; in 6-foot intervals as follows:

- Leading to the door to the voting room
- Leading to the Check-in table
- Leading to the Voting Booth area and Voting Machine area

---
layout: slide
title: "PPE Slide 17"
---

We will provide you with a sheet of yellow arrows to place on the floor to direct voters.

You can also use the blue painter&#39;s tape in addition to the yellow arrows (if necessary) to mark arrows on the floor to direct voters.

Direct voters into the voting room and through the voting process in a manner that will prevent them from crossing paths. Maintain 6-feet of social distancing.

---
layout: slide
title: "PPE Slide 18"
---

Place an extra table in front of the following locations to enforce proper social distancing:

- **Check-In Tables**
- **Ballot Table**
- **Chief&#39;s Table**

---
layout: slide
title: "PPE Slide 19"
---

Each precinct will receive 8 acrylic sneeze guards. They will be packed in cardboard boxes.

Follow the instructions to assemble the acrylic sneeze guards before election day. Save the boxes for re-packing at the end of the day.

**IMPORTANT: Wear gloves! The edges of the acrylic sneeze guards can be sharp.**

---
layout: slide
title: "PPE Slide 20"
---

We will now go over what you need to do during the day on Election Day.

---
layout: slide
title: "PPE Slide 21"
---

Ensure all individuals are maintaining proper social distancing.

Ensure Election Officers are wearing face coverings and gloves.

Ensure single-use items (pens, privacy folders, and Voter Permit Cards) are not recycled or re-used.

Regularly sanitize voting booths and voting surfaces.

Monitor the stations in the voting room to ensure they are following all proper procedures.

Inform Chief of any issues/problems relating to implementation of the Contingency Response Plan.

---
layout: slide
title: "PPE Slide 22"
---

Ensure all individuals in the polling place are adhering to social distancing markings and remaining 6-feet apart at all times, even when speaking or interacting with each other.

Ensure the number of voters in the voting room does not impede on anyone&#39;s ability to remain properly socially distanced.

---
layout: slide
title: "PPE Slide 23"
---

Ensure Election Officers are wearing a face mask or a face shield while in the voting room. We encourage all election officers to wear a face mask, if possible. However, if an election officer says they cannot wear a face mask (e.g. for a medical reason), they are permitted to wear a face shield. You should not question someone&#39;s reason for preferring to wear a face shield.

Election Officers may choose to bring and wear their own face covering, but our office will provide enough face masks and face shields for all officers.

Help ensure Election Officers wear face coverings properly (e.g. always covering nose and mouth, not pulled down to talk, etc.).

Ensure Election Officers wear gloves in the voting room when at stations requiring interaction with voters (e.g. at the Check-In Tables and Ballot Table).

---
layout: slide
title: "PPE Slide 24"
---

Ensure the door to the voting room is propped open, if possible.

Use different doors for voters to enter and exit the voting room, if possible.

---
layout: slide
title: "PPE Slide 25"
---

- Ensure all Poll Pads are setup and at least 6 feet apart.
- Ensure an extra table is placed in front of each Check-In table.
- Ensure blue painter&#39;s tape is used to mark a rectangle on the check-in table.
- Ensure voters are placing their ID in a box lid (from the box of privacy folders) to minimize direct contact.
- Ensure single-use Voter Permit cards are not being recycled.

---
layout: slide
title: "PPE Slide 26"
---

- Ensure the Ballot Officer uses a box lid to receive the single-use Voter Permit Card from each voter.
- Ensure all voters are asked if they want a single-use privacy folder. (Only place the ballot in a single-use privacy folder if the voter wants one.)
- Ensure all voters are given a single-use pen and encouraged to take it with them when they leave.
- Ensure single-use pens, privacy folders are **not** re-used on Election Day.
- Place single-use pens that are left by voters in the &quot;Used Pens&quot; bag.
- Place single-use privacy folders that are left by voters in a trash bag, along with used face coverings and used gloves.

---
layout: slide
title: "PPE Slide 27"
---

- Ensure voting booths are set up at least 6 feet away from each other.
- Ensure you or an Election Officer checks the voting booth after each voter leaves to retrieve any single-use pens left in the booth by the voter. Place them in the bag with the &quot;Used Pens&quot; label.
- Ensure you or an Election Officer sanitizes the voting surfaces inside the voting booths on a regular basis throughout the day (approximately every 30 minutes).

---
layout: slide
title: "PPE Slide 28"
---

- Sanitize the voting machine surface using **alcohol wipes** on a regular basis (every half-hour or as often is practical during busy periods).
- **Do NOT** use the spray disinfectant to clean voting machines.
- Ensure 6 feet of distance between any voters waiting to use the voting machine.
- Ensure you or another Election Officer collects any single-use privacy folders that are left by voters and discarded in the same location as used gloves and face masks.
- If any voters complain about not receiving an &quot;I Voted&quot; sticker, explain that we are minimizing the use of any items that could spread germs.

---
layout: slide
title: "PPE Slide 29"
---

- Ensure hand sanitizer has been provided to election officers to use throughout the day.
- Ensure hand sanitizer is available for voters to use as they **EXIT** the polling place.
- Do not place hand sanitizer at the entrance as it leaves a residue on the ballot and can jam the DS200 scanners.

---
layout: slide
title: "PPE Slide 30"
---

- Encourage Election Officers to wash their hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds before and after setup of the polling place and before and after meals.
- Encourage your fellow Election Officers to take breaks throughout the day. If they take a break outside the voting room, they may remove their face covering and gloves.
- Discourage Election Officers from sharing food or any other materials, such as books or magazines, that could spread germs.
- Ensure you or another Election Officer sanitizes voting surfaces, tables, doorknobs, light switches, handles, and other frequently touched surfaces throughout the day.

---
layout: slide
title: "PPE Slide 31"
---

- Two Election Officers will assist curbside voters.
- **Do not question any voter&#39;s right to vote curbside.**
- Ask the voter to only partially roll down their window.
- Approach the voter from the passenger side door of their car to maintain social distancing.
- Handle only one voter at a time and follow our normal curbside procedures.
- All curbside voters will be given their ballot in a single-use privacy folder.
- All curbside voters will be given a single-use pen that they will keep.

---
layout: slide
title: "PPE Slide 32"
---

- Poll Watchers must first check-in with the Chief Officer and receive a badge that authorizes them to be in the voting room during the day.
- Ensure Poll Watchers inside the voting room wear a face covering at all times. (Poll Watchers are required to bring their own face covering. Do **not** provide them with one from the election officer supplies.)
- Ensure Poll Watchers are at least 6 feet away from voters and Election Officers at all times.
- Ensure Election Officers speak in a clear and firm voice so they can be heard by Poll Watchers.

---
layout: slide
title: "PPE Slide 33"
---

We will now go over what to do if an individual appears ill.

---
layout: slide
title: "PPE Slide 34"
---

What to do if a voter appears ill:

- Remember that it is very possible that the voter has allergies or other health issues not related to COVID-19.
- Remember that we are **not** permitted to ask a voter if they have COVID-19 or to treat a voter differently if they have a cough or if they appear to be ill.
- **Never infringe on a voter&#39;s right to vote.**
- Practice social distancing by staying at least 6 feet away from all voters, Election Officers, Poll Watchers, and any other individuals at the polling place.

---
layout: slide
title: "PPE Slide 35"
---

What to do if an Election Officer appears ill:

- We directed Election Officers to stay home if they are ill or if they have any symptoms, such as a cough, even if they are only suffering from seasonal allergies.

- If an Election Officer shows symptoms of illness at any time during the day, let the Chief know. The Chief will call Election Administration staff at 703-324-4735, then ask the Election Officer to leave.

---
layout: slide
title: "PPE Slide 36"
---

What to do if a poll watcher appears ill:

- The Chief should call Election Administration staff at 703-324-4735 and we will refer the matter to the Electoral Board and seek their guidance.
- Most importantly, ensure that the poll watcher maintains the 6-foot social distancing and encourage them to wear a face covering and gloves.

---
layout: slide
title: "PPE Slide 37"
---

We will now go over end-of day procedures and PPE supply return.

---
layout: slide
title: "PPE Slide 38"
---

Use the last page of the Contingency Response Plan for Polling Place Operations During COVID-19 in determining which supplies to return and which supplies to discard.

**In general, you will RETURN the following supplies:**

- PPE kits with any supplies that were not used
- Acrylic sneeze guards in the boxes they came in
- Unused blue tape
- All face shields (used in a trash bag and unused in the box)
- Social distancing signs with the county seal
- Pens in &quot;Used Pens&quot; bag

**In general, you will DISCARD the following supplies:**

- Used face masks, gloves, alcohol wipes, paper towels, privacy folders, and yellow arrows

---
layout: slide
title: "PPE Slide 39"
---

We are almost done with this training!

---
layout: slide
title: "PPE Slide 40"
---

Here are some important reminders from the Contingency Response Plan for Polling Place Operations During COVID-19:

- Voters can enter the polling place even if they are not wearing a face covering.
- Maintain 6-feet of social distancing at all times.
- Face coverings must be worn by all Election Officers while they are at their station, even if no voters are present.
- Face coverings must be worn by all Poll Watchers and they must bring their own.
- We are providing each Election Officer with a face shield for further protection.
- Use disinfectant wipes and/or spray disinfectant to frequently sanitize voting surfaces and other areas in the polling place.
- Use 75% alcohol wipes to clean Poll Pad and ExpressVote screens every half-hour if they are touched.
- Election Officers will be given frequent breaks.
- We are providing Hand Sanitizer for Election Officers to use throughout the day.
- We are providing Hand Sanitizer for voters to use only as they exit the polling place because sanitizer can leave a residue on ballots that could jam the voting machine.

---
layout: slide
title: "PPE Slide 41"
---

Congratulations! You have now completed this online class.

To receive credit for this class, you must still take and pass the quiz. You can find the quiz in the Election Officer Portal. Go to the Training tab, scroll down, and look in the bottom-right for a link labeled &quot;Quiz&quot;. If you do not pass the quiz the first time, you can take it again until you pass. If you need any help, don&#39;t hesitate to call or email us.

This class is now complete. Thank you and have a great election day!