---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 4"
title: "What is CAP"
---

CAP stands for **Central Absentee Precinct**. CAP is responsible for all ballots submitted prior to election day.

There are two ways a voter may submit a ballot prior to election day:

1. A voter may request an absentee ballot and return his/her ballot by mail or at a drop box location.

2. A voter may vote in person at an early voting satellite location.

So, there are two separate and distinct CAP operations.

For Absentee Ballots received by-mail or drop box:

CAP is responsible for processing and counting mail-in and drop box voter submissions. These operations begin prior to election day, continue on election day, and end at noon on the Friday after election day. Post-election day processing handles mail-in voter submissions, postmarked by election day, but not received until after election day. All CAP processing operations take place at the Fairfax County Government Center.

Please note: for the November 2022 election, the Friday after election day is Veterans Day, a federal holiday. Therefore, post-election CAP operations will extend through Monday, November 14th. Although we will continue to process mailers received by noon on Monday, November 14th, these mailers must exhibit the acceptable postmark, on or before election day.

For In-Person Absentee Voting:

Fairfax County voters may vote early, up to 45 days in advance of election day, at any one of multiple satellite locations set up throughout the county. A voter arrives at a satellite location, receives a ballot, marks their choices on the ballot, and then places the ballot in an on-site digital scanner. On election day, CAP is responsible for submitting the final report which includes the satellite location voting results as well as the number of in-person absentee voters and ballots.
