---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 40"
title: "Mailers with Barcodes – Operation Details"
---

Step 5. You must now meticulously evaluate each mailer to determine if the correct authorized absentee voter sent in the ballot AND to determine if the voter statement contains any material omissions. To accomplish this:

a. Compare the name and address on the _Statement of Absentee Voter_ to the name and address on the voter information label. This includes generational suffixes. Place any mismatches in the "Needs Cure" table box.

b. Examine the voter statement for material omissions. If material omissions are present, place the mailer in the "Needs Cure" table box.

- Review voter information label for special circumstances: Needs Assistance (NA) or ID Required.

Does the voter information label indicate Needs Assistance ("NA")? The mailer may include a blue Request for Assistance form. Remember, you may not open the mailer to check for the blue form; however, you may see the blue form through the hole in the return mailer.

- If the voter signed the voter statement and the voter statement contains no material omissions, the mailer may be checked-in.
- If the information label indicates "NA", and the voter has not provided a signature, place mailer in the "Needs Cure" table box.

Does the voter information label indicate "ID Required"?

- Place mailer in the "Needs Cure" table box.

To expedite the curing process, write the reason(s) why each mailer is sent for curing. For example, if the _Statement of Absentee Voter_ did not include the voter's printed name, write "name", _in pencil_, in the upper right-hand corner of the mailer, above the voter's statement. Appropriate labels include name, address, signature, witness, blank (if the voter's statement includes no information), NA (Needs Assistance), and ID Required.
