---
section: ""
title: "Slide 7"
layout: slide
---

The week before the election, there are 4 things you need to do.

- **Watch the Chiefs Briefing**. This is required, by law, before each election in which you serve as a Chief or Assistant Chief. During the Chiefs Briefing, you will learn about new laws and procedures that affect that election. The Briefing is presented online. The recorded version is posted at the training website.
- **Contact facility staff & visit your polling place.** You will need to schedule in advance with facility staff the site visit time. Sometime the week before the election, the Chief should visit the polling place to meet with building staff, and to examine the voting room and polling place exterior. You also need to schedule the time and place to meet the facility contact to open the building for the Monday pre-election voting room setup. The Chief should also verify your equipment cart containing DS200 scanners, other election materials, yellow curbside sign, and disassembled absentee ballot drop box have arrived. The Assistant Chief should attend too, if possible. Verify that Tuesday 5 AM contact information is still accurate.
- **Chief contacts election officers.** The week before the election, the Chief should send an email or call all election officers to go over basic information. This includes making sure each officer is still working, they know where the building is, they know which entrance to use, and they know which room is the voting room. If any officers say they are no longer able to serve, let the main office know immediately.
- **Plan opening & closing officer assignments.** Opening the polls on Tuesday morning will be a lot more efficient and quicker if you make an advance plan for assigning opening tasks to teams of election officers.