---
section: ""
title: "Slide 56"
layout: slide
---

Here is an example SOR. On the right side, you must staple the correct copy of tapes printed from your DS200 scanner. There are two sets of tapes: Opening tapes and Closing tapes.

Each section of the SOR tells you where to find the numbers you need. The only math you need to do is simple addition, and don't worry, you can use a calculator! Once you get the hang of it, it's pretty straightforward. There are detailed instructions in the Chiefs Notebook that you receive each election. There are specific instructions with images on how to cut and attach the DS200 tapes.

Let's take a closer look at each section.

**Section 1** : In the first section, you will record how many voters were checked in on each Poll Pad, and then record the total.

**Section 2:** In section two, you will record the total number of curbside check-ins, which you will be able to find in the Summary Report on any Poll Pad.

**Section 3:** Here you will use the tapes from the DS200s to record how many ballots were cast.

**Section 4:** Section four simply asks you if the number of voters checked in on the Poll Pad matches the number of ballots cast (sections 1 and 3). If they do match, great, that's what should happen! Simply mark a check next to "yes." Sometimes the numbers may not match up. The most common issue is if a voter was not properly checked-in but still received a ballot. This is why it's crucial to monitor your check-in table first thing in the morning and make sure all officers know how to check-in voters properly. If your numbers are off, make sure to explain here.