---
section: ""
title: "Slide 57"
layout: slide
---

Let's continue with the reverse side of the SOR:

**Section 5:** Here you will find the number of ballots you were issued pre-printed, since we know how many ballots we sent to your precinct. If you received any additional ballots during the day, you would record that on the next line and then add the two numbers up for the total number of ballots issued.

**Section 6:** This is where you account for all your standard ballots. The first number you will record is the "Total Standard Ballot Sheets" from the DS200 Ballot Status Accounting Report. Then you will need to record the number of ballots that were not processed by the DS200. That is: hand-counted ballots (which is usually zero), spoiled ballots (which would go in envelope #4), voided ballots (which should also go in envelope #4), provisional ballots (which should go in #1A and #1B envelopes), and unused ballots. The final number you will record in this section is the total number of used and unused ballots.

**Section 7:** This is the last section where you will need to record any numbers, we're almost there! In this section you will record other ballots, separate from standard ballots, to complete your ballot accounting. Section 7 asks for the total number of ExpressVote cards scanned on the DS200s, which you can find on the Ballot Status Accounting Reports, the number of surrendered absentee ballots, and the number of absentee ballot envelopes collected from the drop box.
