---
section: ""
title: "Slide 3"
title: "At the Office of Elections..."
layout: slide
---

At the office of elections, the return mailer (with its enclosed absentee ballot) has been received, categorized, counted, date stamped, bundled, and a tracking log created as part of the Mail Receipt process. From there, the mailers move on to the next operation, Mail Check-in. This team is responsible for updating the return mailer's status in Virginia's statewide voter database, VERIS. During that process, the mailer status transitions from "issued" (absentee ballot sent to voter), to "pre-processed" (absentee ballot returned, Statement of Absentee Voter completed, with required signatures). Once the Mail Check-in process has been completed, the return mailers cycle forward to Extraction team leads who organize the return mailers for pre-processing.

To begin, the bundled return mailers are made into "batches". Batching is the process of combining bundled return mailers into larger groups which average between 700-900 mailers. When the batch is created, a ballot batch tracking log is generated. The original bundle logs prepared when the return mailer was first received in the office, are attached to the newly created ballot batch tracking log. The batch log (with the associated bundle logs attached) remains with that batch of return mailers throughout the rest of the processing cycle.

The batched return mailers are now ready for the next step, Pre-Processing Phase One – Opening and Extraction.