---
section: ""
title: "Slide 9"
title: "Step 2 – Prep for QA"
layout: slide
---

In preparing the ballots and mailers for QA review, several actions are necessary.

First, each team member takes their stacks of 50 empty return mailers, rubber bands each one, and puts them back into the yellow trays on the table.

Next, the ballots are unfolded. When unfolding, the ballot is placed with the office races facing down on the table, maintaining the stacks of 50 ballots. While you're unfolding the ballot, take small groups of about 10 at a time and gently roll the ballots lengthwise. This action flattens and helps to "nest" the ballots making them easier to be scanned by the DS 850. As you continue to unfold and flatten the ballots, make sure they are facing in the same direction.

During the unfolding and stacking process, you may come across paper tabs at the top of some ballots. These tabs are a leftover from the printer and must be removed as they can cause problems during the scanning process. Once all your ballots are unfolded, give any stacks of less than 50 to the team leader who will consolidate those ballots into a final stack. If this final stack is still less than 50, the team leader will put a sticky note on it saying how many ballots are in that last stack.

Now that all ballots at the table have been unfolded, flattened and nested, the table team leader loads up the batch box. First in, are the stacks of scannable ballots, face down. A colored piece of paper is inserted between each stack as a help to the scan team. Next is the completed ballot batch tracking log and then any non-scannable/damaged ballots. So, your order of materials in the batch box should be; scannable ballots (face down) on the bottom, completed team batch log in the middle, with non-scannable/damaged ballots at the top. The batch box is now ready for review by the Quality Assurance team.