
---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 1"
---

Welcome to the online Pre-Election Chiefs Briefing for the November 3, 2020 General and Special Elections.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 2"
---

My name is Eric Spicer and I am the Election Manager for the Fairfax County Office of Elections. The Electoral Board, the General Registrar, and I thank you for agreeing to serve in this election. We truly appreciate your leadership and commitment to the election process.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 3"
---

Along with myself, this online Briefing will be led by Election Administration staff such as:

- Ravi Udeshi, Election Officer Manager
- Kay Garrison, Election Inventory &amp; Supply Manager
- Tom Bjerke, Voting Equipment Custodian
- and Gillie Cuda, Election Officer Staff Member.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 4"
---

During this online Briefing, we will do our best to provide you with the same type of detailed information that we usually provide during in-person Briefings. We will also provide you with information on our Contingency Response Plan for Polling Place Operations During COVID-19. In addition, you will have an opportunity to participate in a Zoom question and answer session on Friday, October 30 at 10:00 a.m.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 5"
---

The following new protocols and procedures for this election will be covered in detail in this briefing.

Updated Contingency Response Plan for Polling Place Operations During COVID-19

- Each polling place will have at least one PPE Specialist who will receive special training.
- Each polling place will receive 8 Acrylic Sneeze Guards that are to be set up at the check-in stations, ballot table, and Chief&#39;s table. (They should be set up before Election Day.)
- Election Officers and poll watchers in the voting room will be required to wear face masks and/or face shields. We will provide face masks and shields for Election Officers. (We will not provide face masks or face shields for poll watchers or voters.)
- Importance of Social Distancing. You need to maintain at least 6-feet of social distancing between Election Officers, voters, poll watchers, and anyone else in the voting room.
- Single-use pens, Privacy Folders, and Voter Permit Cards will be provided. Alcohol Wipes will be provided for cleaning voting machines and voting surfaces.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 6"
---

**ABSENTEE BALLOT DROP-OFF BOXES**

- An Absentee Ballot Drop-off Box will be located just outside the voting room at each polling place.
- You should assemble the Drop-off Box before Election Day. The Drop-off Box must be monitored by an Election Officer between 6:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on Election Day.
- We have designated two Officers as Absentee Ballot Collectors. These individuals will be responsible for counting and securing voted absentee ballots at 7:00 p.m. and immediately driving them to the Fairfax County Government Center. The Absentee Ballot Collectors will also be responsible for emptying the Drop-Off Box and securing absentee ballots during the day if the Drop-Off Box is full.
- At the end of the Election Day, after the two Absentee Ballot Collectors have removed, counted, and secured all of the absentee ballots, please take apart the Drop-Off Box and put it back in the box that it came in. Then put the box on top of the Voting Equipment Cart.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 7"
---

**NON-ROUTINE SPECIALIST**

- Each polling place will have a Non-Routine Voting Specialist to assist with non-routine voters. This individual will not be a manager, will not make any decisions concerning provisional voters or moving conditions, and will not take the place of the Chief or Assistant Chief in any way.

**ELECTION PAGES**

- Election Pages will be used at many polling places for this election. Pages can help greet voters, manage lines, and direct voters to the Absentee Ballot Drop-off Box if the voter is just dropping off a voted absentee ballot.
- Important Reminder: Just like Election Officers, Pages are required to wear a face mask and/or a face shield and they are required to stay at least 6-feet away from voters, Election Officers, and anyone else in the polling place.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 8"
---

**ACCEPTABLE IDs and CHECK-IN PROCESS**

- There are significant changes to acceptable IDs, as covered in the Changes to Virginia Election Laws training class.
- If a voter does not have an acceptable ID, they may sign an ID Confirmation Statement.
- When a voter is checking-in, the Pollbook Officer will only repeat the name of the voter – not their address.

**CURBSIDE VOTING**

- Two Election Officers will go out for curbside voting.
- Curbside voters can return completed absentee ballot envelopes from their car and the two Officers will take the ballot envelope to the Absentee Ballot Drop-Off Box and deposit it on behalf of the voter.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 9"
---

**BALLOTS**

- You will receive 1 to 5 boxes containing full ballots in English.
- You will also receive a box that contains 180 additional ballots in
 11 envelopes:
- 50 full ballots in Spanish
- 25 full ballots in Vietnamese
- 25 full ballots in Korean
- 10 Federal-only ballots in English
- 10 Federal-only ballots in Spanish
- 10 Federal-only ballots in Vietnamese
- 10 Federal-only ballots in Korean
- 10 Presidential-only ballots in English
- 10 Presidential-only ballots in Spanish
- 10 Presidential-only ballots in Vietnamese
- 10 Presidential-only ballots in Korean

- A Ballot Request Sign in 4 languages (English, Spanish, Vietnamese, and Korean) will be posted at the front of the Ballot Table.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 10"
---

**SAMPLE BALLOTS**

- Sample ballots need to be posted in all four languages.

**POSTERS**

- Posters for the Proposed Virginia Constitutional Amendments need to be posted in all four languages.
- Posters for the 4 Bond Issues need to be posted in all four languages. This is a total of 16 posters.

**BROCHURES**

- Brochures for the Proposed Virginia Constitutional Amendments (in four languages) will be distributed to voters on a table near the entrance to the voting room. Do not hand brochures to voters.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 11"
---

**UPDATED ORDINANCE ON FIREARMS IN POLLING PLACES**

- On September 15, 2020, the Board of Supervisors passed an ordinance whereby firearms, ammunition, components or combination thereof are prohibited in buildings, parks, recreation and community centers owned or used by the County, or authorities and entities created or controlled by the County.
- This prohibition is also in effect at permitted events in buildings not owned by the County, or by any authority or local government entity created or controlled by the County, when such building, or part thereof, is being used for a governmental purpose. Voting falls under this section of the ordinance.
- Therefore, no weapons may be carried, concealed, or possessed in the portion of the building reserved and used for voting. In addition, the following restrictions apply:
- **Schools** – Firearms are not permitted anywhere in the School or on School grounds.
- **Government Facilities** – Firearms are not permitted anywhere in government facilities and we will post a sign providing this notification.
- **Private Facilities** – Different rules associated with firearms apply at individual private facilities, but firearms are not permitted in the polling place in any private facility on election day.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 12"
---

On the front of the ballot, all voters in Fairfax County will have the opportunity to vote for Electors for President and Vice President, a Member of the United States Senate, and a Member of the United States House of Representatives.

(In addition, voters in the Town of Herndon will have the opportunity to vote for Mayor and not more than six Members of Town Council.)

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 13"
---

On the rear side of the ballot, all voters in Fairfax County will have the opportunity to vote for two Proposed Virginia Constitutional Amendments and four Proposed Fairfax County Bond Issues.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 14"
---

Each precinct will receive ballots for 54% of your registered voters. We expect the turnout at polling places to be relatively low because of the very large number of voters who have chosen to vote absentee in-person or by mail before Election Day. All ballots are 17-inches in length and they are 2-sided.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 15"
---

Due to the length of the ballot, you will have ballots in four different languages for this election instead of having all four languages on the same ballot. As the default, you should instruct your Ballot Officer to give all voters the English language ballot.

We will provide you with a sign informing voters that they may request a ballot in English, Spanish, Vietnamese, or Korean and the sign will be printed in all four languages. Please post this sign in front of the Ballot Table. Your Ballot Officer should NEVER ask a voter what type of ballot they would like. It is the voter&#39;s responsibility to request a ballot in a different language and we do not want to assume that any voter wants something other than an English language ballot.

You will also receive Presidential-only ballots (10 for each language) and Federal-only ballots (10 for each language) that will be packed in a box with your foreign language ballots. You will use these ballots if there is a message on your Poll Pad indicating that the voter should not receive the regular full ballot. Please call Voter Registration staff at 703-324-8765 if you have any questions about these ballots.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 16"
---

Each polling place will receive 3 to 6 Poll Pads and you should set up one Poll Pad for the Chief and set up all other Poll Pads at check-in stations if possible.

Each polling place will receive 15 voting booths. You should set up all voting booths if possible. This is necessary because it takes voters longer to vote the long ballot. Remember to space the voting booth at least 6-feet apart.

Each polling place will also receive two or three DS200 scanners and two ExpressVote machine. Please set up all of your DS200 voting machines so they will be ready for voters to use them.

Please set up one ExpressVote machine and keep the second ExpressVote machine as a backup.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 17"
---

For this election, 12 to 20 election officers are assigned to each polling place. These include:

- **Chief and Assistant Chief** : Manage the polling place and work with non-routine voters.
- **Voter Information Officer/Greeter** : Assist voters as they enter the voting room and answer questions.
- **Pollbook Officers** : Check-in voters.
- **Ballot Officer** : Issue ballots to voters.
- **Voting Booth Officer** : Monitor voting booths and clean voting surfaces.
- **Voting Machine Officer** : Monitor the voting machine and assist voters.
- **Non-Routine Specialist** : Assist with non-routine voters at the direction of the Chief.
- **PPE Specialist** : Oversee the process for social distancing and sanitizing the voting room.
- **Absentee Ballot Drop-Off Box Officer** : Monitor the Drop-Off Box.
- **Absentee Ballot Collectors** : These individuals may perform any functions, as designated by the Chief, during the day. At 7:00 p.m., they will be responsible for counting and securing the contents of the Absentee Ballot Drop-Off Box and returning these absentee ballots to the Fairfax County Government Center. You will find more information about this function in another slide. They are also responsible for counting and securing absentee ballots during the day if the Drop-off Box fills up. You will find more information about this function in another slide.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 18"
---

Please review the position descriptions for all positions, including: the Non-Routine Specialist, the PPE Specialist, the Voter Information Officer/Greeter, the Pollbook Officer, the Ballot Officer, the Voting Booth Officer, the Voting Machine Officer, and the Absentee Ballot Drop-Off Box Officer.

You should remove these position descriptions from the back of your Notebook and give each one to the Election Officer who will serve in that position.

Please note the following:

- The Voting Booth Officer should maintain 6-feet of social distancing if possible while assisting voters. Please note that it is very important for the Voting Booth Officer to quickly remove any single-use pens that a voter leaves in the voting booth and dispose of them. Remember that single-use pens are not to be re-used on Election Day.
- The Voting Machine Officer should quickly dispose of any single-use pens that a voter leaves near the voting machine. The Voting Machine Officer should also dispose of any single-use privacy folders that are left by voters and put them in the trash.
- The Absentee Ballot Drop-off Officer is the individual who will monitor the Absentee Ballot Drop-off Box between 6 a.m. and 7 p.m. You can rotate this position and have different Officers perform this function throughout the day. It is important to note that this position is different from the two Absentee Ballot Collectors who are responsible for counting and securing absentee ballots at 7:00 p.m. and taking them to the Fairfax County Government Center along with a signed Transfer Form.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 19"
---

For this election, many polling places will have high school students serving as Election Pages to assist Election Officers and voters. These students are volunteers who have completed a training class in election procedures, the use of the voting equipment, and how to assist persons with disabilities. They may not mark the pollbooks, issue ballots to voters, or operate voting machines. Pages can help set up and take down voting machines and Poll Pads.

Pages can also serve as Greeters, fill out the purple line-length survey form, direct voters to the proper room in co-located precincts, direct voters to the Absentee Ballot Drop-off Box if they are just dropping off a voted absentee ballot, and assist disabled voters. Pages can also help count ballots throughout the day. Do not confuse Pages with 18-year-old Election Officers. The 18-year-old Officers are registered voters who have all the same legal responsibilities and authority as other Election Officers.

Pages are required to wear face masks and/or face shields. Pages are also required to social distance at least 6-feet away from voters, Election Officers, and anyone else in the voting room.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 20"
---

Next we will talk about the absentee ballot drop-off box.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 21"
---

Each polling place will receive one Absentee Ballot Drop-Off Box that will be packed in a cardboard box. This Drop-Off Box will be used by voters who wish to deposit their completed absentee ballot envelopes.

Voters from anywhere in Fairfax County can return completed absentee ballot envelopes in a Drop-Off Box at any polling place.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 22"
---

You will receive written assembly instructions with the Drop-Off Box.

You should plan to assemble the Drop-Off Box before election day when setting up the voting room.

After assembling the Drop-Off Box, lock the compartment at the lower back of the Drop-Off Box.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 23"
---

Let&#39;s go over the Drop-Off Box in more detail.

**Location of the Drop-Off Box:** You should locate the Drop-Off Box outside of your voting room, away from the line of voters, near the entrance to the voting room in an area that is visible to voters.

**Hours of Operation:** The Absentee Ballot Drop-Off Box must be set up by 6:00 a.m. and available for voters between 6:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on Election Day. Any voters in line at the Drop-Off Box at 7:00 p.m. must also be permitted to place their voted absentee ballots in the Drop-Off Box.

**Security:** The Chief will designate an Election Officer to monitor the Absentee Ballot Drop-Off Box from 6:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. on Election Day. Another officer may relieve the officer who is monitoring the Drop-Off Box, but you must ensure that the first officer does not leave until their replacement arrives, so the Drop-Off Box is never unattended.

**Curbside Voters:** Curbside voters may return voted absentee ballot envelopes. The two officers who assist the curbside voter will place the absentee ballot envelope in a green folder, take it inside, and deposit the voted absentee ballot envelope in the Absentee Ballot Drop-Off Box.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 24"
---

**Important Note:**

Voters will not be required to provide identification or identify themselves when they place a voted absentee ballot envelope in the Drop-Off Box.

**Number of Ballot Envelopes that Voters Can Insert in the Drop-Off Box:**

Voters are permitted to place more than one voted absentee ballot envelope in the Drop-Off Box.

**Check the Drop-Off Box Several Times During the Day:**

Two Officers, identified by our office before election day and designated as the _Absentee Ballot Collectors_ in your precinct, will need to open the Drop-Off Box and determine if it is full several times during the Election Day. If the Drop-Off Box is full, they will remove and count the voted absentee ballot envelopes and seal them in a white box. They will then place seals on the white box with the name of the precinct, the date, and their signatures. They will also record the number of ballots contained in the white box.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 25"
---

**Absentee Ballot Collectors**

We have assigned two Officers, representing different political parties, as Absentee Ballot Collectors. At 7:00 p.m., these Officers are required to count and secure the absentee ballots that were deposited in the Absentee Ballot Drop-off Box. The Absentee Ballot Collectors are also required to count and secure the absentee ballots from the Drop-off Box during the day if it gets full.

**Closing Procedures**

The Absentee Ballot Collectors must be stationed at the Drop-Off Box at 7:00 p.m. After any voter present at 7:00 p.m. has placed their voted absentee ballot in the Drop-Off Box, these Officers will open the Drop-Off Box and count the number of voted absentee ballot envelopes. After counting the voted absentee ballot envelopes, the Absentee Ballot Collectors will place the ballots in a white cardboard box that the Chief received when they picked up their supplies. The Absentee Ballot Collectors will then place seals on the white box with the name of the precinct, the date, the number of absentee ballot envelopes, and their signatures. They will also complete and sign a Transfer Sheet. After sealing the box and completing the Transfer Sheet, they will take the boxes of absentee ballots and the Transfer Sheet to Room 339 in Government Center at 12000 Government Center Parkway.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 26"
---

**Important Notes**

Initially, we planned to have the Chief Officers return absentee ballots from the Absentee Ballot Drop-off Boxes with their other election materials that they return at the Fairfax County Government Center or Mount Vernon Government Center. We changed this plan, and assigned two Absentee Ballot Collectors at each polling place, to keep live absentee ballots separate from the other election materials and to get them back to the Fairfax County Government Center in a quick and efficient manner.

As a result, the information in the Absentee Ballot Drop-off Box Closing Procedures section of your Election Manual at the bottom of page 1.5 (where it says that the Chief will return these absentee ballots) is incorrect.

Please call Election Administration staff at 703-324-4735 if you have any questions.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 27"
---

Hi, my name is Gillie and I work on the Election Officer team. I&#39;m going to take you through the Contingency Response Plan for Polling Place Operations During COVID-19.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 28"
---

This is a message to all election officers from the Election Manager, Eric Spicer.

&quot;It is our responsibility to provide each eligible voter in Fairfax County with the opportunity to exercise their right to vote in an efficient and equitable manner. The Fairfax County Electoral Board, the Director of Elections, the hard-working staff in the Office of Elections, and our team of dedicated Election Officers continually strive to provide voters with outstanding customer service, well-run polling places, accurate results, and an excellent voting process. In these difficult times, as we navigate uncharted waters, we will continually strive to maintain these high standards while also implementing a comprehensive plan to protect Election Officers, voters, political observers, county support staff, representatives at our polling place facilities, and any other individuals involved in the election process.

In March 2020, we began working with county staff, health professionals, and the State Department of Elections to enact every feasible contingency measure to combat COVID-19 at our polling places while also maintaining the integrity of the election process. As a result of these actions; detailed training; and successful communication and feedback between our dedicated staff and Election Officers, we were successful in our efforts to maintain the very high standards that Fairfax County residents expect and deserve.

For the November 2020 Presidential Election, we will expand the successful measures that we implemented for the June 2020 Primary Elections, which were well received by more than 95 percent of our Election Officers according to a post-election survey. In addition, we will provide a dedicated PPE Specialist; additional PPE supplies and materials including acrylic sneeze guards for check-in stations, the ballot table, and the Chief&#39;s table; disinfectant/sanitizing wipes; and additional social distancing signs and arrows in an effort to further improve and enhance our Contingency Response Plan for COVID-19.

Although we will do our best to prepare and implement a thorough and comprehensive Contingency Response Plan, issues may arise that we have not foreseen, or you may have questions that we have not answered. In that case, please feel free to contact Election Administration staff at 703-324-4735 with any questions or concerns. We are in this together and I am confident that we will succeed. I welcome your feedback and appreciate your hard work and dedication.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 29"
---

For this election, we are providing the following resources:

- A PPE Specialist who will be specially trained to post social distancing signs and markings, help maintain social distancing, and sanitize voting surfaces.
- Face masks, gloves, and sanitizer for Election Officers to use throughout the day.
- Clear face masks for Election Officers to wear, if requested to do so by a voter, so the voter can read their lips.
- A face shield for each Election Officer to use in addition to their face mask, or in place of their face mask if they have a medical condition that prevents them from wearing a face mask.
- We will enable Election Officers to take frequent breaks throughout the day.
- We will encourage voters to wear face masks. However, if a voter does not have a face mask, do not turn them away. They are permitted to vote.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 30"
---

- We will provide two copies of the county Social Distancing Signs that will be posted at the entrance to the voting room to remind voters to maintain 6-feet of social distancing.
- We will provide six copies of the 6-FT Social distancing sign and 6 copies of the blue and white Social Distancing sign that we used in the June 2020 Primary Elections.
- We will provide Social Distancing Round Blue Circles that you will tape to large cones (in Schools) or to the floor to maintain 6-feet of social distancing. We will also provide wide blue &quot;painter&#39;s&quot; tape that can be used to mark X&#39;s on the floor every 6-feet to maintain social distancing.
- We will provide Yellow Arrows to help maintain the flow of voters to maintain social distancing. We will also provide wide blue &quot;painter&#39;s&quot; tape that can be used to mark additional directional arrows.
- We will provide disinfectant for Election Officers to clean voting surfaces throughout the day.
- We will provide alcohol wipes that can be used to clean voting machines and voting surfaces.
- We will provide hand sanitizer for voters to use just before they leave the polling place.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 31"
---

We directed Election Officers to stay home if they are ill or if they have any symptoms, such as a cough, even if they are only suffering from seasonal allergies. Please call Election Administration staff at 703-324-4735 if an Election Officer at your polling place appears to be ill.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 32"
---

We will provide you with two laminated copies of the social distancing signs with the county seal. Post these signs at the entrance to the voting room.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 33"
---

We will provide you with two types of Social Distancing signs. You will receive 6 copies of each sign. You should post these signs at the entrance to the polling place, entrance to the voting room, check-in tables, ballot table, voting booth area, and voting machine area.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 34"
---

We will provide you with 15 Round Blue Social Distancing Signs to place on the floor in 6-foot intervals. If your voting room is in a School, School Staff will provide you with large cones and you should tape the Round Blue Social Distancing Signs to the cones and place them in 6-foot intervals. In other locations you can use blue painter&#39;s tape to **tape** the signs to the floor.

**IMPORTANT: Do not affix the round signs directly to the floor. Tape them to the cones or the floor.**

You can use the tape in addition (if necessary) to mark X&#39;s on the floor in 6-Foot Intervals.

Place Round Signs and/or wide blue &quot;painter&#39;s tape&quot; in 6-foot intervals as follows:

- Leading to the door to the voting room
- Leading to the Check-in table
- Leading to the Voting Booth area and Voting Machine area

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 35"
---

Use arrows to direct voters.

- Place the yellow directional arrows on the floor to direct voters.
- If needed, use blue painter&#39;s tape to create additional arrows on the floor to direct voters.
- Direct voters into the voting room and through the voting process in a manner that will prevent them from crossing paths
- Maintain 6-feet of social distancing.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 36"
---

Ensure Election Officers are wearing a face mask or a face shield while in the voting room. We encourage all election officers to wear a face mask, if possible. However, if an election officer says they cannot wear a face mask (e.g. for a medical reason), they are permitted to wear a face shield. You should not question someone&#39;s reason for preferring to wear a face shield.

Election Officers may choose to bring and wear their own face covering, but our office will provide enough face masks and face shields for all officers.

Help ensure Election Officers wear face coverings properly (e.g. always covering nose and mouth, not pulled down to talk, etc.).

Ensure Election Officers wear gloves in the voting room when at stations requiring interaction with voters (e.g. at the Check-In Tables and Ballot Table).

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 37"
---

Each precinct will also receive 8 clear **Acrylic Sneeze Guards** to be placed at the Check-In tables, Ballot Table, Chief&#39;s Table, and other areas. Note that there is a cutout at the bottom to allow voters and officers to easily exchange materials (e.g. voter IDs, ballots, etc.).

NOTE: The sneeze guards you receive will be completely transparent after you remove the protective cover. However, in this picture, we have added blue tape to the edges of the acrylic sneeze guard so you can see it better.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 38"
---

Place an extra table in front of the check-in tables and Chief&#39;s table to maintain 6-feet of social distancing between voters and Election Officers. In addition, make sure that you maintain 6-feet of social distancing between all individuals in the voting room.

Use blue painter&#39;s tape to mark a rectangle on the Check-in table. Place a box lid from a box of privacy folders inside the rectangle. Direct voters to place their photo ID in the box lid on the check-in table.

Slide the box lid back and forth through the opening in the sneeze guard to maintain social distancing.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 39"
---

- Offer all voters a single-use privacy folder.
- Only place the ballot in a single-use privacy folder if the voter indicates that they would like a privacy folder.
- Place the ballot (inside the single-use privacy folder if the voter asked for one) inside the box lid.
- Place a single-use pen on top of the ballot in the box lid.
- Single-use pens and privacy folders will not be re-used on Election Day.
- Dispose of any single-use pens that are left by voters by putting them in the trash.
- Place single-use privacy folders that are left by voters in a trash bag along with used face coverings and used gloves.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 40"
---

- Ensure voting booths are set up at least 6 feet away from each other.
- Ensure you or an Election Officer checks the voting booth after each voter leaves to retrieve any single-use pens left in the booth by the voter. Dispose of them in the trash.
- Ensure you or an Election Officer sanitizes the voting surfaces inside the voting booths on a regular basis throughout the day (approximately every 30 minutes).

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 41"
---

- Sanitize the voting machine surface using **alcohol wipes** on a regular basis (every half-hour or as often is practical during busy periods).
- **Do NOT** use the spray disinfectant to clean voting machines.
- Ensure 6 feet of distance between any voters waiting to use the voting machine.
- Ensure you or another Election Officer collects any single-use privacy folders that are left by voters and discarded in the same location as used gloves and face masks.
- If any voters complain about not receiving an &quot;I Voted&quot; sticker, explain that we are minimizing the use of any items that could spread germs.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 42"
---

- Ensure hand sanitizer has been provided to election officers to use throughout the day.
- Ensure hand sanitizer is available for voters to use as they **EXIT** the polling place.
- Do not place hand sanitizer at the entrance as it leaves a residue on the ballot and can jam the DS200 scanners.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 43"
---

- Two Election Officers will assist curbside voters.
- **Do not question any voter&#39;s right to vote curbside.**
- Ask the voter to only partially roll down their window.
- Approach the voter from the passenger side door of their car to maintain social distancing.
- Handle only one voter at a time and follow our normal curbside procedures.
- All curbside voters will be given their ballot in a single-use privacy folder.
- All curbside voters will be given a single-use pen that they will keep.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 44"
---

The following are important reminders from the Contingency Response Plan:

- Voters can enter the polling place and vote even if they are not wearing a face covering.
- Maintain 6-feet of Social Distancing between everyone in the polling place.
- We are providing Face Masks and Face Shields for every Election Officer and Page.
- We are not providing Face Masks or Face Shields for voters or poll watchers.
- Face Masks and/or Face Shields must be worn by Election Officers and poll watchers in the voting room, even if no voters are present.
- We are providing a PPE Specialist who will receive special training to oversee social distancing and sanitizing all surfaces touched by voters, Election Officers, and anyone else in the voting room.
- We are providing Acrylic Sneeze Guards that are to be set up at every check-in station, the ballot table, and the Chief&#39;s table. These sneeze guards should be set up before Election Day. Important Note: You are still required to place an extra table in front of the check-in tables, ballot table, and Chief&#39;s table to maintain social distancing. We emailed you pictures that show you how to assemble the sneeze guards. Please call your Rover if you have any questions. At the end of the Election Day, please take the sneeze guards apart, put them back in the boxes that they came in, and put the boxes on top of your Voting Equipment Cart.
- Use Spray Disinfectant to frequently sanitize voting surfaces and other areas that are touched.
- Use Alcohol Wipes to clean Poll Pad and ExpressVote screens.
- Election Officers are to be given frequent breaks.
- We are providing Hand Sanitizer for Election Officers to use throughout the day and for voters to use only as they exit the polling place.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 45"
---

Let&#39;s go through the tasks you should complete before election day.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 46"
---

All Chiefs and Assistant Chiefs must pickup essential election supplies the week before election day.

Everyone will receive a Chiefs Notebook and election supply envelope at your Supply Pickup time.

Usually, the Chief in each precinct receives just a black rolling kit. This election, the Chief will receive many more materials:

- Black rolling kit
- 4 to 5 cardboard boxes of PPE materials
- 4 large Zip-Loc bags of PPE materials
- Flat unassembled white cardboard boxes (for securing absentee ballots from the Drop-Off Box)

If you are the Chief, please make sure you have enough space in your car to take all of these materials with you. We will have a staff member take them to your car and load them inside.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 47"
---

First, you should have received a Precinct Roster by email. You will also receive a printed copy at your Supply Pickup time.

The Precinct Roster contains information for all of your election officers, including their name, phone number, email address, how many elections they have previously worked, and any additional languages they may speak.

If you have a Language Officer on your roster, that is an individual who has been assessed for their language skills in Spanish, Vietnamese, Korean, Mandarin Chinese, Arabic, or Farsi. They perform all regular election officer duties but may also assist voters who speak a second language.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 48"
---

You should have also received a printed High School Page Roster at your Supply Pickup time.

If you are the Chief, don&#39;t forget to contact your High School Pages, if any, and go over any precinct-specific information with them.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 49"
---

This is the Polling Place Info Sheet. You should have received a copy by email already and you will also receive a printed copy at your Supply Pickup time.

All information on your Polling Place Info Sheet came directly from your polling place. The Chief should contact the polling place well before election day to confirm all details listed.

If you and your polling place mutually agree to change the voting room, send an email to notify our office.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 50"
---

OK, you&#39;ve watched the Chiefs Briefing and picked up your election materials. What else do you need to do the week before election day?

First, both the Chief and Assistant Chief should submit their curbside phone numbers. If your cell phone number on file is the curbside phone number you want to use, you do not need to take any further action. We will pre-print both the Chief and Assistant Chief&#39;s curbside number; on election day, you can select either number and insert it into your curbside voting sign.

Next, the Chief should contact all election officers. Go over information specific to your precinct and answer any questions your officers may have, especially those serving for the first time.

Lastly, the Chief should contact the polling place. If possible, visit the week before and meet your building contact, inspect the voting room, and verify your voting equipment has arrived.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 51"
---

Now, let&#39;s jump forward to the day before the election! What do you do?

First, the Chief will receive the Sheriff&#39;s Envelope. This envelope contains last-minute materials, including the iSync drive with the final list of registered and absentee voters. If you are the Chief, you do not have to be home; the Sheriffs will post it at your front door. If you do not receive it by 3:00 PM, let us know immediately so we can arrange for a backup to be delivered to you.

In addition, all available officers should help setup the polling place. You must first confirm the setup day and time with your polling place – don&#39;t just show up! It&#39;s especially important for the November 2020 election because most polling places are currently closed to the public and staff may not be present.

NOTE: If your polling place is a school, you may request to setup on the Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, or Monday before the election. As always, confirm the details with your polling place contact.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 52"
---

Hi, my name is Kay Garrison and I am the Inventory and Supply Manager.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 53"
---

Please review your notebook. At the end of the evening, you may keep the notebook or trash it. Please don&#39;t leave it in the precinct.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 54"
---

Please make sure you have all the supplies. Try to keep the papers in the kit in the same order so they will be easier to find. There will be no **I VOTED**** stickers** this election. Remember you have blue handout sheets at the end of your notebook to give to your officers to help them pack up supplies at the end of the evening.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 55"
---

This is my phone number and my email address. If you don&#39;t reach me, please leave a message and I will return your call or your email.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 56"
---

This sheet will help you with where to post your signs. The election officers may be putting up the signs, but it is up to the Chief and the Assistant Chief that the signs are in the correct places.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 57"
---

Each precinct will receive single-use pens, which you should distribute at the Ballot Table. Please have voters test the pens on the scratchpads before leaving to mark their ballots.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 58"
---

Each Chief has a pencil case in his/her kit that contains items such as a stapler, scissors, rubber bands, and a new envelope sealant bottle.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 59"
---

The 40-foot no campaigning rope has been marked at 6-ft and at 12-ft to help you measure where to mark your taped X&#39;s and social distancing signs.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 60"
---

Please use the 10 cards in the plastic bag first. There is no need to count the cards in the wrappers. Open only if needed.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 61"
---

Use this Demonstration Ballot, if needed, to show voters how to fill in the circles on the ballot. **Do not use** the yellow sample ballot to do this.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 62"
---

If a voter is moving to another state and wants to cancel their registration in Virginia, they could use this form to do so.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 63"
---

**Please** do not write on or put stickers on any of the pouches or badges. Use the blue sheets in the back of Chiefs notebook as a check off list.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 64"
---

You will receive two #1A envelopes. One with a label, one without a label. Please use the one with the label first. If you don&#39;t need the second envelope just return it as is. If you use the second envelope, please fill out the back of envelope and place the (1A-2) signature seal on the back of the envelope. Don&#39;t forget the two signatures. Please return both envelopes.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 65"
---

This is only used if voting hours are extended by a Court Order. Please return empty, unsealed, and unmarked – unless Court order was issued.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 66"
---

You will also receive two #4 envelopes. Again, please use the one with a label first. If you don&#39;t use the second #4, just return it as is. If you use it, place the (#4–2) signature seal on the back of the envelope. Again, please return both envelopes.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 67"
---

When calling the office, always provide your precinct number and name.

For example: 100 PATRIOT, not Lincoln High School.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 68"
---

Hi, it&#39;s Ravi again. Let&#39;s go through some items election morning and during the day!

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 69"
---

What&#39;s the first thing you should do on election morning? Swear in your officers! But if any officers are late, don&#39;t wait – swear in the officers who are present and start delegating tasks.

If any officers have not arrived by 5:30 AM, call our office. We will send out replacement officers, if possible.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 70"
---

A very important reminder: make sure you insert the iSync drive into each and every Poll Pad in use! Remember, the iSync drive contains the most updated list of registered voters and absentee voters. If you do not use the iSync drive, your Poll Pads will be out-of-date.

The iSync drive arrives in the Sheriff&#39;s Envelope that the Chief receives. Do not forget to bring it on election morning! My suggestion? Put it in your black rolling kit, so you can&#39;t possibly forget it.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 71"
---

If you have any issues with your Poll Pads election morning or during the day, you can consult the Poll Pad Troubleshooting Guide in section 14 of your Chiefs Notebook.

This section contains 27 common situations and step-by-step instructions for how to resolve them.

If you need further help, don&#39;t hesitate to call Technical Support on election day.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 72"
---

If you have Poll Watchers, you must collect a written authorization form from them. They cannot simply show you an email on their phone.

Remember that once authorized, Poll Watchers may move around within a voting room. They may observe, but not interact with voters. If they see an issue, they should talk to you directly as the Chief or Assistant Chief.

**IMPORTANT** : In this election, you may have individuals who come to the polling place and want to serve as unauthorized Poll Watchers. Remember, if they do not submit a written authorization form to you that is signed by the county or state chair of their party, they cannot serve as Poll Watchers. If you have any issues with unauthorized Poll Watchers, call our office on election day for assistance.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 73"
---

Please make sure that your Election Officers demonstrate good polling place etiquette. They should always be professional, welcoming, and kind. They should always ask before offering to assist a voter and be courteous and appropriate in their verbal and non-verbal communication. They should never tell a voter that they cannot vote, never touch a voter without their permission, and never discuss political topics. They should also never tell jokes to voters or to Election Officers when voters are present.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 74"
---

This is basic etiquette for assisting individuals with disabilities. Speak directly to any person with a disability, not to their companion or sign-language interpreter. When speaking with someone who has a hearing impairment, speak directly, clearly, slowly, and expressively. Wave your hand If you need to get someone&#39;s attention. Always identify yourself when meeting someone with a visual impairment. When conversing in a group, be sure to identify the person to whom you are speaking. Ask before you help; do not assume the person needs help. If a person does need assistance, allow the person to indicate how best to assist them before taking action. Do not make assumptions or decisions on what a person with a disability can or cannot do. Be sensitive about personal contact. Grabbing someone, even if you intend to give assistance, could knock the person off balance. Be sensitive about contact with assistive devices such as wheelchairs, walkers, canes, and guide dogs. These aids are part of an individual&#39;s personal space.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 75"
---

As always, we are conducting turnout surveys on election day at 9:00 AM, 12:00 PM, and 3:00 PM. These help us gauge turnout throughout the day and send you more ballots, if needed.

At each designated time, we will send you a text message with an online link. You may also call us instead.

We strongly encourage you to pull out this page from your Chiefs Notebook and hand it to one of your election officers, as anyone may submit these numbers. It may be helpful to set alarms on their phone, so they don&#39;t forget!

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 76"
---

If you have any issues or problems on election day, make sure to document them in your Chief&#39;s Notes.

The Electoral Board and many office staff review these immediately after the election, so it&#39;s very important to include all significant issues so that we may follow-up on them.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 77"
---

This is the Election Officer Evaluation Form. We ask that you complete this form for each of your officers to provide us with the feedback we need to be able to assign the best possible team to each precinct in future elections.

If you have any officers who are truly excellent, or any officers who need significant improvement, please make sure to add written comments to help us understand why. We review these very carefully after each election.

We strongly encourage you to complete all evaluations by 5:00 PM on election day, so it doesn&#39;t distract you from closing the polls.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 78"
---

Most of your voters will be processed routinely by your Election Officers but there will be a few who will have some special circumstances and will need some additional help from the Chief or Assistant Chief. This section covers the most common election day circumstances you will encounter.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 79"
---

When your election officers have a voter they cannot check in on the Poll Pad and need to refer to the Chief, have them fill out a Voter Referral Worksheet with the &quot;reason for the referral&quot; box checked off. This worksheet will help you understand the issue you need to resolve and where to find it in the &quot;What-Ifs&quot; section of your Chiefs Notebook.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 80"
---

The Non-Routine Voter Chart is in Section 5 of your Notebook. It covers the most common non-routine issues and guidance on what action to take. This is a quick start summary of the &quot;What-Ifs&quot; section. Please take some time to familiarize yourself with this document as it will save you time on election day.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 81"
---

The more detailed, step by step guide is the &quot;What-Ifs&quot; section which is located in the Chief&#39;s Notebook. Make sure you are familiar with the &quot;What-Ifs.&quot;

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 82"
---

The first non-routine situation is if a voter does not have an ID when they come to the polling location. There are three alternatives for the voter.

- As of July 2020, the voter can now complete the new ID Confirmation Statement. If the voter completes this statement, they are eligible to vote normally.

- The voter can vote provisionally and provide the Office of Elections with an acceptable ID by 12:00 p.m. on the third day after the election.

- The voter can retrieve their ID from their car or home. But please do not tell them they _must_ retrieve the ID to vote. This is not accurate. They are still eligible to vote with an ID Confirmation Statement or a Provisional Ballot.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 83"
---

This is an example of the ID Confirmation statement. As you can see, it&#39;s a quick form to fill out!

First, the Chief, Assistant Chief, or Non-Routine Specialist fills in the precinct number and name, the date, and their initials.

Next, give the form to the voter, who signs and prints their name and writes the date. They may also add their birth year and last 4 digits of their social security number.

Lastly, check in the voter on the Poll Pad and select the &quot;Voter Signed Oath&quot; flag.

In following this procedure, a voter would be allowed to vote normally. That means you would issue them a regular ballot, they would mark it at the polling place, and they would deposit it in a DS200 ballot scanner.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 84"
---

If the voter chooses to vote provisionally, provide them with a Provisional Vote Envelope, Provisional Voter Notice and a ballot. Use the Lime Green Provisional Envelope for ID provisional voters and the darker green envelope for all other provisional voters.

Remember - it is critical that the envelope is filled out completely and the voter and the Election Officer both sign the Provisional Ballot Envelope.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 85"
---

The Electoral Board and only the Electoral Board decides whether a provisional ballot is counted.

Some voters may ask you if their provisional vote will be counted. You cannot tell them one way or the other since the Electoral Board always makes the final decision.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 86"
---

Sometimes, the Poll Pad may indicate that someone is a &quot;HAVA voter.&quot; A HAVA voter is someone who registered to vote using the Help America Vote Act of 2002 and must show acceptable identification from the HAVA-eligible list of IDs the first time he or she votes in a federal election in the state.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 87"
---

On the Poll Pad, you will receive a special prompt for HAVA voters.

To proceed, the HAVA voter must show you one of the following IDs, per the Code of Virginia:

- A current and valid photo identification (from the list of acceptable IDs)
- A copy of a current utility bill, bank statement, government check, paycheck, or other government document that shows the name and address of the voter.

For example, a student ID with photo is acceptable for all voters, including HAVA voters. However, a student ID without photo could be used by most voters, but not a HAVA voter.

IMPORTANT: If a HAVA voter does not have an acceptable ID, the ID Confirmation Statement is NOT sufficient. Instead, they may complete a provisional ballot. However, there is a special &quot;HAVA-ID Provisional Voter Notice&quot; specifically for HAVA voters without acceptable ID. Do not give the regular no-ID provisional notice to a HAVA voter.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 88"
---

You may see a lot of this in this election since there has been an unprecedented number of absentee ballot requests - so be prepared!

There are two situations that may present themselves. The first is if the voter has the absentee ballot in their possession and the second is if they do not. Let&#39;s cover the first situation.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 89"
---

If a voter has a completed absentee ballot envelope, first remind them they have the option of depositing it in the Absentee Ballot Drop-Off Box. Of course, some voters may not want to do this and will choose to surrender their absentee ballot so they may vote in-person instead.

If the voter has the ballot and chooses to surrender it, ask the voter to hand it to you, write ABSENTEE SPOILED on it, and then you can process the voter as a routine voter on the Poll Pad. You will need to provide a password to update the voter&#39;s status on the Poll Pad. The spoiled ballot will go in Envelope #4.

If the voter does not have the absentee ballot with them, they can still vote provisionally. Provide them a GREEN Provisional Envelope, Provisional Notice and a ballot. Make sure the envelope is filled out completely and the reason code #4 box is checked.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 90"
---

If the voter has moved, there are a couple of questions you need to ask: &quot;When did they move?&quot; and &quot;How far did the voter move?&quot;

These situations can be tricky, so please do not hesitate to call Voter Registration staff in the Office of Elections if you are unsure of what to do.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 91"
---

This image is of the Moving Conditions chart from the &quot;What-Ifs&quot; section in the Chiefs Notebook. You will need to consult this anytime you have a voter who has moved and their current residential address does not match their registered address on the Poll Pad.

First, ask the voter, &quot;When did you move?&quot;

Then, determine &quot;How far did the voter move?&quot;

At the intersection of these two answers, the chart will guide you to a specific section of the &quot;What-Ifs&quot; which will give you detailed instructions on moving forward. This chart can be a bit confusing so you should definitely familiarize yourself with this chart before election day. If you do have questions on election day, don&#39;t hesitate to call Voter Registration staff in the Office of Elections.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 92"
---

If a voter moved to another state less than 30 days before a presidential election, they may vote a Presidential-only ballot.

This is a ballot that has only one contest.

Follow the instructions in What-If 8b for more information.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 93"
---

Voters can become inactive if they do not respond to a confirmation mailing or if they moved and did not update their voter registration. If the voter has moved, you need to go to the &quot;What-Ifs&quot; section of the Notebook.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 94"
---

If the Inacitve voter has not moved, then they need to fill out the &quot;Affirmation of Eligibility&quot; form.

The Chief must complete Section A of the form and check option A.

The voter will complete Section B on the opposite side of the form.

You do not need to fill out the &quot;Statement of Challenger&quot; part of the form.

Once the form is completed the voter can be checked in on the Poll Pad. (Remember to check the &quot;Voter Signed Oath&quot; flag on the Poll Pad.)

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 95"
---

There are some voters who will need assistance reading, translating, or marking the ballot.

Many times, they will come with a person who will assist them. Others may need an Election Officer to assist them. Just about anyone can assist a voter but they all need to fill out this form.

The only exception is children who are age 15 or younger. They may assist without filling out the form.

Please remember that if an Election Officer assists a voter, they should still try to maintain the 6-feet of social distancing. We know this will be difficult but it&#39;s very important.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 96"
---

The top part of the Request for Assistance form is filled out by the Election Officer and then given to the voter to fill out Section A.

Section B is filled out by the person who will assist the voter. In Section B, that person is affirming that they are not one of the &quot;prohibited&quot; class of people.

Once this form is completed and returned to the Chief, the voter&#39;s assistant can provide any help with the ballot.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 97"
---

Voters who are over 65 or disabled are eligible to vote outside the polls. Given the current health crisis, do not question any voter&#39;s eligibility to vote curbside.

The voter will call the curbside number and two election officers will go out to the curb and assist them.

No form is required for someone to be able to vote curbside, but some voters may need assistance so the election officer should take a Request for Assistance form with them.

The voter can vote routinely, as long as the Election Officer checks the &quot;Outside Polls&quot; flag on the Poll Pad.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 98"
---

Always send 2 officers outside to help curbside voters.

Do not take Poll Pads outside.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 99"
---

We will now go through Closing Procedures.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 100"
---

Before you or your Election Officers close the DS200 and begin completing the election forms, you must check the Auxiliary Compartment to make sure it&#39;s empty, even if you don&#39;t think you used it during the day.

If there are any ballots inside the Auxiliary Compartment, remove them and insert them into the scanner. If any ballot cannot be scanned, you will have to hand-count them.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 101"
---

After the DS200 tape prints, you will need to cut it in certain places and attach them to the appropriate document. There is a handout in the back of your Chiefs Notebook that provides some extra guidance on how to do this.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 102"
---

Follow the instructions in Section 8 of the Chief&#39;s Notebook to complete your Statement of Results (SOR).

You should complete the back page, with the candidate totals, first. This way, you can call in your results as soon as possible. A lot of people are waiting to find out who won!

IMPORTANT: Remember though that all election officers should focus on closing the polls. Do not let anyone get distracted with speculating about which candidates may be ahead or will win.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 103"
---

As soon as you complete the SOR candidate totals sections, you should copy the information over to your call sheets.

You should have two call sheets: a **buff** color one that you will post at the precinct and a **blue one** that the Chiefs will drive back on election night.

As soon as you&#39;ve filled out your call sheets, call in your results.

If you are not able to call in your results by 8:30 PM, you should call your Rover so they may help you if needed.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 104"
---

Once you have closed down and unplugged the DS200 and the ExpressVote machines, you will need to remove the media sticks, also known as USB flash drives, and return them in the orange #7 pouch.

As of March 2020, you must remove all media sticks from all machines, whether you used them for voting or not.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 105"
---

To remove the media stick from the ExpressVote machine, open the access door on the left side using the barrel key and then pull the media stick labeled with the green dot.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 106"
---

To remove the media sticks from the DS200, first open the front media compartment using the barrel key and remove the media stick (with the orange dot) from the USB port.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 107"
---

After locking the front media compartment, close the DS200 screen and then open the rear battery compartment behind the screen. Pull the media stick with the yellow dot from the USB port and then close and lock the compartment.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 108"
---

Removing and Securing the Ballots:

Step 1: Open the Ballot Compartment as shown

Step 2: Carefully remove and secure the ballots from the DS200 machine

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 109"
---

Step 3: Remove all the ballots. Check the sides and inside door.

Step 4: Collect the ballots into a neat stack.

Step 5: Place ballots in the cardboard boxes. You may reuse the empty boxes that the new ballots came in plus you have 3 additional boxes in the grey cart. You should be able to get at least 800 ballots in one box so if you know that you have more than that you can prepare more boxes as need beforehand.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 110"
---

Step 6: Use the RED tamper tape to seal the box by placing one strip across the seam on the top and another strip completely around the box as shown.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 111"
---

Step 7: Prepare the labels for the boxes but do not affix them. Count the number of boxes and label as shown. Using the white #3 Counted Ballots sheet, write the DS200 serial number (which can be found on the back of the DS200 screen) as well the box number. In this example, there are 2 boxes of counted ballots. The first box is labeled Box 1 of 2 and the second box is labeled Box 2 of 2. Make 2 copies for each box.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 112"
---

Step 8: On the front and side of each box, place the prepared white #3 sheets.

Step 9: Place a yellow #3 sticky label on top.

Step 10: All officers who are present must sign yellow #3 sticky labels.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 113"
---

Unvoted ballots should be secured, sealed and labeled using the blue #6 Unused Ballots sheet. Count the number of boxes and number them accordingly. Again, make 2 copies for each box and place one sheet on the front and one sheet on the side of the box.



---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 114"
---

Remember, the new white cardboard boxes are used for the absentee ballot envelopes from the Drop-Off Box. As soon as they have sealed and secured the white cardboard boxes, the 2 Absentee Ballot Collectors should immediately drive them to Room 339 in the Fairfax County Government Center.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 115"
---

You will receive 2 types of seals in the grey cart. They are found in the clear plastic portfolio on the top shelf of the cart. In the first picture on the top, there are 2 tab seals, one red and one blue. The red tab seal is used to secure the orange #7 pouch and the blue tab seal is used to secure the blue #2 pouch. The red zip tie seals are used to secure the voting equipment.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 116"
---

Use the tab seals for the pouches. Be careful inserting the seal, it breaks easily. In case one of them breaks, you may use a red zip tie seal to secure the pouch by sliding it under the lock as shown.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 117"
---

There are a number of documents that require signatures from the Chief, Assistant Chief, and all Election Officers.

For all documents, the Chief should always sign in position 1, the Assistant Chief should sign in position 2, and the two Absentee Ballot Collector officers should sign in positions 3 and 4. All other election officers may sign in the remaining positions. Please try to have all officers sign in the same spot on each form (e.g. the officer who signs in position 5 on the Oath should sign on position 5 on all other forms).

Before you finish packing everything, use the Required Signature Checklist in the Chiefs Notebook to ensure that all officers have signed all required documents. If any required document is missing an Officer&#39;s signature, we will call the Election Officer whose signature is missing and they will have to come to the Office of Elections within 2 days to sign them. It&#39;s much better to make sure everything is signed on Election Day than to have to come to our office! But you should never have your officers pre-sign forms and labels during the day.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 118"
---

In the Handouts section of your Notebook, you will find the checklist of items to return in the Black Kit. It is important that all Envelopes and Pouches be returned in the Black Kit. Please use this checklist to make sure that you have all the items.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 119"
---

Also in the Handouts section, you will find a gray cart inventory sheet. There are pictures of what the cart looks like when you receive it and what it should look like when you return it. You can use this page to make sure you have returned the correct items to the gray cart.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 120"
---

Return unused bottles of hand sanitizer and disinfectant spray in a PPE bag within the box.

Remove the spray nozzle and secure the original lid tightly to avoid spillage.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 121"
---

Return ALL unused PPE supplies in the bag or box that they came in.

Return all used face shields in the special bag.

Dispose of any used single-use pens and privacy folders.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 122"
---

Chiefs, please bring this sign with you when you return your election materials. **Do not pack** it in your kit. Place it in your windshield when driving up to the Fairfax County Government Center or Mount Vernon Government Center so we can quickly identify your precinct.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 123"
---

Please refer to Section 9 of your Notebook for a checklist of the items that are to be returned to Government Center in the Chief&#39;s car.

All of these items must be returned in the chief&#39;s car on election night:

1. Black rolling kit
2. Blue supply bag
3. Green Poll Pad case
4. PPE Supplies
5. Blue Results Sheet
6. Windshield sign
7. Brown #3 boxes (voted ballots)
8. Brown #6 boxes (unvoted ballots)

If any of the items are missing, you will be required to return to your polling place and retrieve them.

Lastly, please be sure that you call your Rover when leaving the polling place or by 9:30PM, whichever comes first.

---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 124"
---

If you have any questions, submit them by email to: **ElectionOfficers@fairfaxcounty.gov**

We will host an optional Zoom webinar on Friday, October 30 at 10:00 AM to answer these questions. Afterwards, we will also email a recording to all Chiefs and Assistant Chiefs.

You have now finished reviewing the online Chiefs Briefing. You must return to the Election Officer Portal and take the quiz to acknowledge you have reviewed this briefing.

_ **Thank you and have a great election day!** _