---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 18"
---

Please review the position descriptions for all positions, including: the Non-Routine Specialist, the PPE Specialist, the Voter Information Officer/Greeter, the Pollbook Officer, the Ballot Officer, the Voting Booth Officer, the Voting Machine Officer, and the Absentee Ballot Drop-Off Box Officer.

You should remove these position descriptions from the back of your Notebook and give each one to the Election Officer who will serve in that position.

Please note the following:

- The Voting Booth Officer should maintain 6-feet of social distancing if possible while assisting voters. Please note that it is very important for the Voting Booth Officer to quickly remove any single-use pens that a voter leaves in the voting booth and dispose of them. Remember that single-use pens are not to be re-used on Election Day.
- The Voting Machine Officer should quickly dispose of any single-use pens that a voter leaves near the voting machine. The Voting Machine Officer should also dispose of any single-use privacy folders that are left by voters and put them in the trash.
- The Absentee Ballot Drop-off Officer is the individual who will monitor the Absentee Ballot Drop-off Box between 6 a.m. and 7 p.m. You can rotate this position and have different Officers perform this function throughout the day. It is important to note that this position is different from the two Absentee Ballot Collectors who are responsible for counting and securing absentee ballots at 7:00 p.m. and taking them to the Fairfax County Government Center along with a signed Transfer Form.