---
layout: slide
title: "Preparation of Ballots"
---

After a complete set of voter submissions has been preprocessed, remove the ballots from the B envelopes.  Place the FOLDED ballots in the cardboard box labeled "Ballots".  To maintain voter integrity and confidentiality it is important that the ballots remain FOLDED when placed in the Ballot box.  Do not unfold the ballots at this time.  

Place the mailers with empty B envelopes in the "Mailers with Empty B Envelopes" table box.  Place a rubber band around the entire set of mailers.  On the top mailer write the following information:  date, team #, set #, and mailer count.

Then, when all the ballots in the set have been removed and placed into the Ballot box, it is time to flatten and count the ballots in preparation for reconciliation.  After reconciliation, the flattened ballots will be stored in ballot security cases.  Both team members will help to complete this task.
 
**Ballot Unfolding** 
 
To prepare ballots for reconciliation and storage:
 
1.     Remove ballots carefully from the ballot collection box and unfold.  
2.     As ballots are unfolded, carefully inspect for the following issues:  tears, slices, damaged or missing code channel marks, crimped top or bottom edge, smudges, or foreign material.  Set aside damaged ballots by clipping together so they remain segregated from the other ballots.
3.     Back-fold the crease on each fold in the ballot. A few ballots can be back-folded at once. Do not over-bend the ballot, as this may cause it to bend in the opposite direction, weakening the fold or creating an additional fold.
4.     Roll up the longest side once, perpendicular to the creases.
5.     Put the ballots in the same orientation and with the fold lines "nested." 
 