---
layout: slide
title: "But, before we get started…"
---

Before we can get down to the task of recording receipt of return mailers into VERIS, you need to be familiar with the different types of return mailer envelopes that will come across your desk.

For voters in Fairfax County, there are three broad categories of return mailers: domestic, UOCAVA/overseas mailer, and UOCAVA email.  UOCAVA stands for Uniformed and Overseas Citizens Absentee Voter Act.

The **domestic** return mailer is used by a Fairfax County resident who does not wish to or is unable to vote in person.  

An overseas or **UOCAVA** return mailer, is used by those Fairfax County residents who are active-duty military or civilians living abroad.  Uniformed members can be stationed either overseas or located at a stateside military base such as Ft. Belvoir. Finally, there are the **UOCAVA email** envelopes.  A voter living overseas may request a ballot and accompanying materials be emailed to them.  Once the request is approved, the voter is emailed a PDF containing a ballot, voting materials and instructions, as well as envelope templates used to create their B envelope and return mailer.  Once completed, the voter mails their ballot in a B envelope back to the Office of Elections through the postal service, **not via email**. 

The domestic and UOCAVA return mailers are delivered to the Office of Elections primarily by the post office.  We also receive return mailers through commercial mail delivery services such as FedEx, DHL, and UPS.  A third method of receipt is by the voter bringing their return mailer to one of the early voting sites located throughout the county or to the Fairfax County Government Center, Office of Elections, 12000 Government Center Parkway, room 323.

The return mailing fees for all domestic and UOCAVA return mailers is **US Postage Paid**.   
