---
layout: slide
title: "NON-ROUTINE VOTERS, PART 2: What if...voter requested an absentee ballot?"
---

What if a voter requested a mailed absentee ballot, but then comes to the polling place anyways?

First, let's look at the steps if the voter comes to the polling place WITH their absentee ballot.

-   First, the voter should surrender their ballot to you. If it is still sealed in the envelope, ask them to open the envelope to verify the ballot is present. If the voter has made selections in any contest, ask them to fill in all bubbles for those contests, so no one knows who they intended to vote for.
-   Next, you must write "absentee spoiled" across the face of the ballot. Place this ballot in envelope #4 with other spoiled and voided ballots.
-   Now you may check-in the voter on the Poll Pad and allow them to vote a regular ballot.

Now let's look at the steps if the voter comes to the polling place WITHOUT their absentee ballot.

-   This one is very straightforward: simply offer the voter a provisional ballot.
-   Office of Elections staff will verify that the voter did not already vote an absentee ballot in-person or by mail.

**<span style="color:red;">NOTE: For the June 2020 Primary Elections, many more voters than usual have requested an absentee ballot and we expect an increase in the number that will show up at polling places. Make sure you understand this What-If situation and feel free to call our office before election day for any questions.</span>**
