---
layout: slide
title: "CAP Absentee Positions"
---

One chief officer (CAP Chief) is responsible for all CAP operations across the three Fairfax County congressional districts (CDs) and will complete the CAP Statement of Results (SOR) at close of business on the Friday following election day. Assistant chiefs aid the chief as needed and perform the duties of the chief in his/her absence. Separately, a chief officer for early voting (CAP EV) is responsible for tabulating and completing a CAP EV SOR on election day.
 
Election officers are responsible for administering the absentee voting process.  This may include serving as a check-in officer, electronic pollbook (EPB) officer and/or ballot officer to process absentee ballots, serving as a member of the ballot preparation team and serving as a member of a handcount team.
 
The handcount team physically tabulates the votes on ballots that cannot be digitally scanned. For more detailed information regarding the handcount process, refer to the handcount training module or the EO manual.
  
The scan team operates the DS850 high-speed digital scan voting machine.
 
Poll watchers and other authorized individuals may be present in the polling place for periods of time on Election Day.  Poll watchers are party or candidate representatives with written authorization.  They are authorized to hear and observe CAP activities, but may not interfere with the orderly conduct of the election or touch or handle any voter submission including the ballot, voting machine or official document.
