---
section: "BASIC INFORMATION"
title: "Slide 14"
title: "Election Officer Roles"
layout: slide
---

During the day, election officers may rotate among these main duties.

- **VOTER INFORMATION OFFICER**: This officer is stationed near the voting room entrance. They greet voters and confirm they are in the right polling place, remind voters to have their ID out and ready, and direct voters to review the sample ballot before checking in. This person should also answer any voter questions before they get to the check-in table.

- **POLLBOOK OFFICERS**: These officers are stationed at the check-in tables and check in voters on the Poll Pads. There is usually one Pollbook Officer per Poll Pad.

- **BALLOT OFFICER**: After a voter is checked in, they move to the Ballot Table, where a Ballot Officer issues them a ballot in a privacy folder and provides instructions on how to mark the ballot.

- **VOTING BOOTH OFFICER**: This officer stands near the voting booths and directs voters to an open voting booth. If a voter has questions about how to mark their ballot, they may ask this officer.

- **VOTING MACHINE OFFICER**: This officer guides the voter in casting their ballot and ensures the DS200 has accepted the ballot before the voter leaves. They stand at least 5 feet away from the scanner at all times for the privacy of voters and should not look at a voter’s ballot for any reason. They also maintain the line and direct voters to the exit after they cast their ballot.

- **DROP-OFF BOX OFFICER**: Remember, all precincts have an Absentee Ballot Drop-Off Box and there must be an election officer stationed there at all times from 6:00 AM to 7:00 PM. Another officer may relieve the officer who is monitoring the Drop-Off Box, but you must ensure that the first officer does not leave until their replacement arrives so the Drop-Off Box is never unattended. IMPORTANT: This duty should not be confused with the Absentee Ballot Collectors position. *All* officers may rotate through this position, not just the 2 officers designated as Absentee Ballot Collectors (who will drive absentee ballots to the Government Center after polls close).

- **PPE SPECIALIST**: This individual is responsible for ensuring all procedures from the Action Plan for Polling Places During COVID-19 are followed properly and should help sanitize voting booths, check-in tables, and other voting surfaces regularly. Any officers who have completed the PPE Specialist training may rotate through this duty.

As you take turns assuming each of these roles throughout the voting day, remember that your job is to efficiently process routine voters, who will be more than 95% of all voters. If you encounter a non-routine voter, just send them to the Chief or Assistant Chief!
