---
section: ""
title: "Slide 4"
title: "What is CAP"
layout: slide
---

CAP stands for Central Absentee Precinct. CAP is responsible for all ballots submitted prior to election day.

There are two ways a voter may submit a ballot prior to election day:

1. A voter may request an absentee ballot and return his/her ballot by mail or at a drop box location.

2. A voter may vote in person at an early voting satellite location.

So, there are two separate and distinct CAP operations.

For Absentee Ballots received by-mail or drop box:

CAP is responsible for processing and counting mail-in and drop box voter submissions. These operations begin prior to election day, continue on election day, and go through noon on the Friday after election day. Post-election day processing handles mail-in voter submissions, postmarked by election day, but not received until after election day. All CAP processing operations take place at the Fairfax County Government Center.

For In-Person Absentee Voting:

Fairfax County voters may vote early, up to 45 days in advance of election day, at any one of multiple satellite locations set up throughout the county. A voter arrives at a satellite location, receives a ballot, marks their choices on the ballot, and then places the ballot in an on-site digital scanner. On election day, CAP is responsible for submitting the final report which includes the satellite location voting results as well as the number of in-person absentee voters and ballots.