---
section: ""
title: "Slide 13"
layout: slide
---

The tools of the mailer check-in trade include:

- A stationery supply box

- A Mailer Count worksheet: The main function of the Mailer Count worksheet is to track the number of mailers checked-in by an individual. At the end of the day, the team leader will compile all the checked-in totals to determine a daily grand total. It is the responsibility of every staff member to ensure that the Mailer Count worksheet is completed accurately.

- A Material Omissions Chart: The Material Omissions chart is a comprehensive, user-friendly table outlining acceptable/unacceptable standards for the review of voter statements. A material omission is a voter's failure to provide complete and correct information in his voter statement or a failure to properly submit his/her ballot. Such actions may render that ballot unqualified for counting.

 As mailer check-in staff, you are expected to make important decisions regarding the acceptance of a voter's ballot based on the information provided in the voter statement These decisions must be made fairly and consistently. If there is any question about the information in a voter statement, the answer can usually be found in the Material Omissions chart.

 However, if you are ever in doubt, ask the team leader.

- A barcode reader

- Two clear plastic collection boxes labeled "Saved in VERIS", and "Not Processed"; a green plastic tray to hold "Completed Digital Bundles" or a blue plastic tray to hold "Completed Email Bundles".

- A computer with VERIS access