---
section: ""
title: "Slide 45"
title: "Mailers with Barcodes - Operation Details"
layout: slide
---

Step 17. Your last task is to complete the Mailer Count worksheet to account for both the checked-in mailers and "Needs Cure" mailers.

- Record the number of mailers that were originally taken from the tray, (probably 50) in the Total Mailers at Start column for Set 1.

- Count the number of domestic checked-in mailers. Record this number in the Total Checked-in Domestic Mailers column for Set 1. If you have checked-in domestic UOCAVA voters, be sure to record this number in the appropriate column.

- When you were evaluating the voter statement for material omissions, did you place any mailers in the "Needs Cure" table box? Record this number in the Needs Cure Mailers column for Set 1.

The number of checked-in mailers + the number of needs cure mailers = the number of mailers at start.

When these numbers reconcile, attach a "Needs Cure" wrap to the mailers that will be sent to curing. Write the Bundle # and the Set # on the paper and total number of mailers included within the wrap. Leave these mailers in the "Needs Cure" table box.

To expedite the curing process, check-in staff will write the reason(s) why each mailer is sent for curing. For example, if the Statement of Absentee Voter did not include the voter's printed name, write "name", in pencil, in the upper right-hand corner of the mailer, above the voter's statement. Appropriate labels include name, address, signature, witness, blank (if the voter's statement includes no information), NA (Needs Assistance), and ID Required.