---
section: "BEFORE POLLS OPEN"
title: "Slide 10"
title: "The week before"
layout: slide
---

The week before the election, there are 3 things you need to do.

- **Attend a Chiefs Briefing**. This is required, by law, before each election in which you serve as a Chief or Assistant Chief. At the Chiefs Briefing, you will learn about new laws and procedures that affect that election and you will receive your Chiefs Notebook and other election materials. Notably, Chiefs will receive a black rolling kit with many election documents and forms.
**NOTE: For the June 2021 Party Primary Elections, the Chiefs Briefing will be available to watch online. You will also schedule a time to pick up your election materials.**
- **Visit your polling place.** Sometime the week before the election, the Chief should visit the polling place to meet with building staff and see the voting room. The Chief should also verify your gray supply cart, DS200 scanners, and disassembled Absentee Ballot Drop-Off Box and Acrylic Sneeze Guards have arrived. The Assistant Chief should attend too, if possible.
- **Chief contacts election officers.** The week before the election, the Chief should send an email or call all election officers to go over basic information. This includes making sure each officer is still working, they know where the building is, they know which entrance to use, and they know which room is the voting room. If any officers say they are no longer able to serve, let the main office know immediately.



