---
layout: slide
title: "BEFORE POLLS OPEN: Set up Chief's Table"
---

As a new Chief or Assistant Chief, it's vital that you set up your Chief's Table with all items you may need. We suggest you actually use 2 tables side-by-side: one to hold these documents and forms and another where non-routine voters may sit as you help them.

-   **Voter Forms:** Keep the different voter forms handy, including the Request for Assistance form for assisted voters, Affirmation of Eligibility for inactive voters, and Voter Registration Application for new or moved voters. We will go over these situations in more detail later in this training.
-   **Provisional Materials:** Some non-routine voters may only be eligible to cast a provisional ballot. Keep your provisional log, provisional envelopes, and provisional notices handy for them.
-   **Numbered Envelopes:** There are some numbered envelopes that you will put materials in throughout the day. For example, provisional materials go in envelope #1A, spoiled and voided ballots go in envelope #4, and completed voter forms will go in envelope #8.
-   **Chief's Notes:** This is where you will document any unusual situations or problems that occur on election day.
-   **Chiefs Notebook:** Remember, you will have your Chiefs Notebook on election day, which will walk you through all situations that may arise, including how to help any non-routine voters and what forms they may need to complete.
-   **Poll Pad & Printer:** You will have a special "Admin Poll Pad" and printer, which you should setup at your Chief's Table. If needed, you can look up or check-in non-routine voters using this Poll Pad. It will sometimes print "tickets", which you will return in envelope #8. If a voter is in the wrong precinct, it can also print directions to their registered polling place.

Keep your Chief's Table tidy throughout the day. The better-organized your Chief's Table is, the easier it will be for you to find what you need to help process non-routine voters!
