---
layout: slide
title: "Slide 20"
title: "USPS delivered"
---

We've got mail, so let the fun begin. The bulk of our returned mailers are delivered by the US Postal Service (USPS) around mid-morning. You'll notice on the slide that each Congressional District and Herndon have their own post office box number. This fact means the returned mailers arrive from the post office in gray USPS trays already organized by Congressional District and Herndon town. For example, you'll see all of CD8 returned mailers stacked in one or more trays, all of CD10 mailers stacked in one or more trays, and so on. From there, our job really begins.

Starting with the trays from CD8, you'll quickly scan the mailers in each tray to ensure they all have the same colored stripe extending to the right of the large turquoise band. Remember, CD8 stripe is yellow; CD10 stripe is green; CD11 stripe is purple, and Herndon stripe is orange. As you're going thru the tray, pull any mailers that are not, in this case, from CD8 and place them in a separate black tray. Doing this allows another team to take those erroneously sorted mailers and put them in the correct trays with mailers from the other CDs and Herndon.

Additionally, you'll come across mailers that were not able to be delivered to the voter by the post office. Those returned mailers are known as "undeliverables". These envelopes are larger in size than the other mailers so they're easy to spot in the tray. Pull all undeliverables and place them in the black tray for further processing by another team.