---
layout: slide
title: "Sorting"
---

Step 1 – Sorting. The bulk of our return mailers are delivered by the post office around mid-morning in gray USPS trays.  Absentee ballot return mailers may be mixed in with daily elections office mail.  If that’s the case, your first task will be to separate the absentee ballot return mailers from the general elections office mail.  Once done, we’ll separate the return mailers for two elections: Vienna town election and the Democratic primary. 

For the Vienna town election, all return mailers will be placed in one tray.  For the Democratic primary, you’ll separate by congressional district (CD8, CD10, CD11). Remember, each congressional district has its own color stripe on the return mailer which helps us in the sorting process:  CD8 is yellow, CD10 is green, CD11 is purple and Vienna town is orange.  Then, as needed, you’ll sort again within each CD by those delegate district holding primaries.  The delegate district numbers are printed on the return mailer next to the CD color code.  Keep together the delegate district races by placing a rubber band around each batch, even if it is only one envelope. Also, separate UOCAVA return mailers by CD and place them vertically in the front of the corresponding CD tray. 

As you sort, place UOCAVA email, undeliverable, or return to sender mailers in a black tray for processing by another group.  Once you fill a red tray with return mailers organized as above, do a quick scan to verify that the tray contains correctly sorted and batched mailers.

The work done in separating return mailers allows the us to count the number of the various type of ballots returned. Additionally, ballots will be pre-processed by CD or CD/delegate district.
