---
layout: slide
title: "count, date/time stamp, open"
---

Now that you’ve sorted the envelopes and verified that only one CD is contained in one or more trays and have batched the DDs within the CD having primaries, it’s time to date/time stamp, open and count each return mailer received in the day’s mail.  All three actions are done automatically by machine, the Omation IM-410.  

Ballots are opened in batches as sorted (CD and DD).  Beginning with one CD, place a handful of return mailers of the same batch into the machine’s feeder. Each DD with elections are opened and counted as separate batches. The machine automatically maintains a running count of the return mailers passed thru the machine, stamps the date and time on each envelope, and opens them.  Take the stack of envelopes that have been through the machine and place them in red trays. Bundle each DD batch using a rubber band. Each red tray is labeled with a tag identifying the CD.  

Once all mailers from a batch have been run thru the Omation IM-410, read the number of envelopes counted and record that number on the returned ballot count sheet, according to batch category (CD, DD, UOCAVA, etc.)

**Important:** before you begin processing the return mailers for the next batch you must do two things: 
Check the surrounding area to make sure all return mailers from the previous batch have been run through the machine, and
Be sure you have **zeroed** the number count on the Omation  IM-410 touch pad.  

**Remember to keep all drop-off mail separate from USPS/other commercial delivered mail.** 
